<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

of August 2, 2018. This information is current as

Supplementary

## Material

## Inflammasome Reporter Cells

## All you have &amp;0 do is ASC

## Migration in Innate Immunity A Fundamental Role of Myh9 for Neutrophil

Weckbach, Barbara Walzog and Daniela Begandt Annegret Boda, Meike Miller, Konstantin Stark, Ludwig T. Annette Zehrer, Robert Pick, Melanie Salvermoser,

published online 1 August 2018 J Immunol

ol.1701400 http://www.jimmunol.org/content/early/2018/07/31/jimmun

0.DCSupplemental http://www.jimmunol.org/content/suppl/2018/07/31/jimmunol.170140

Submit online. ? The JI Why

- from submission to initial decision Rapid Reviews! 30 days* ·
- Every submission reviewed by practicing scientists No Triage! ·
- 4 weeks from acceptance to publication Fast Publication! ·

average *

Subscription

http://jimmunol.org/subscription is online at: The Journal of Immunology Information about subscribing to

Permissions

http://www.aai.org/About/Publications/JI/copyright.html

Submit copyright permission requests at:

Email Alerts

http://jimmunol.org/alerts Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up at:

<!-- image -->

## A Fundamental Role of Myh9 for Neutrophil Migration in Innate Immunity

Annette Zehrer,* Robert Pick,* Melanie Salvermoser,* Annegret Boda, † Meike Miller, † Konstantin Stark, † Ludwig T. Weckbach,* ,† Barbara Walzog,* and Daniela Begandt*

Neutrophils are the first leukocytes to arrive at sites of injury during the acute inflammatory response. To maintain the polarized morphology during migration, nonmuscle myosins class II are essential, but studies using genetic models to investigate the role of Myh9 for neutrophil migration were missing. In this study, we analyzed the functional role of Myh9 on neutrophil trafficking using genetic downregulation of Myh9 in Vav-iCre /Myh9 + wt/fl mice because the complete knockout of Myh9 in the hematopoietic system was lethal. Migration velocity and Euclidean distance were significantly diminished during mechanotactic migration of Vav-iCre /Myh9 + wt/fl neutrophils compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl control neutrophils. Similar results were obtained for transmigration and migration in confined three-dimensional environments. Stimulated emission depletion nanoscopy revealed that a certain threshold of Myh9 was required to maintain proper F-actin dynamics in the front of the migrating cell. In laser-induced skin injury and in acute peritonitis, reduced Myh9 expression in the hematopoietic system resulted in significantly diminished neutrophil extravasation. Investigation of bone marrow chimeric mice in the peritonitis model revealed that the migration defect was cell intrinsic. Expression of Myh9-EGFP rescued the Myh9-related defects in two-dimensional and threedimensional migration of Hoxb8-SCF cell-derived neutrophils generated from fetal liver cells with a Myh9 knockdown. Live cell imaging provided evidence that Myh9 was localized in branching lamellipodia and in the uropod where it may enable fast neutrophil migration. In summary, the severe migration defects indicate an essential and fundamental role of Myh9 for neutrophil trafficking in innate immunity. The Journal of Immunology , 2018, 201: 000-000.

P the innate immune system and are essential for an effecolymorphonuclear neutrophils are prominent members of tive immune response. During acute inflammation, neutrophils are the first leukocytes to arrive at the site of injury (1, 2). The recruitment of neutrophils from the blood stream into the inflamed tissue follows a consecutive multistep cascade that includes capturing, rolling, firm adhesion, adhesion strengthening,

*Walter Brendel Centre of Experimental Medicine, University Hospital and Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology, Biomedical Center, LMU Munich, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany; and † Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik I, Klinikum der Universita t, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universita t Mu nchen, 81377 Munich, Germany

ORCIDs: 0000-0001-7729-6565 (B.W.); 0000-0001-8491-9820 (D.B.).

Received for publication October 6, 2017. Accepted for publication July 11, 2018.

This work was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB 914, project A02 [B.W.], B02 [K.S.], and Z03 [B.W.]).

A.Z. performed in vitro and in vivo experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. R.P. performed spinning disk confocal microscopy and stimulated emission depletion nanoscopy and analyzed the data. M.S. and L.T.W. performed acute peritonitis experiments. M.M. and K.S. generated bone marrow chimeric mice. A.B. and K.S. performed two-photon microscopy and laser-induced ear injury. B.W. and D.B. designed the overall study, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript.

Address correspondence and reprint requests to Prof. Dr. Barbara Walzog, Walter Brendel Centre of Experimental Medicine, University Hospital and Institute of Cardiovascular Physiology and Pathophysiology, Biomedical Center, LMU Munich, Großhaderner Straße 9, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany. E-mail address: walzog@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

The online version of this article contains supplemental material.

Abbreviations used in this article: BDM, 2,3-butanedione monoxime; 2D, twodimensional; 3D, three-dimensional; dHoxb8 cell, Hoxb8-SCF cell-derived neutrophil; fMIVIL, N -formyl-Met-Ile-Val-Ile-Leu; gDNA, genomic DNA; KD, knockdown; NA, numerical aperture; NMII, nonmuscle myosin class II; pn-blebbistatin, para -nitro blebbistatin; rm, recombinant murine; SCF, stem cell factor; STED, stimulated emission depletion; WT, wild type.

Copyright /C211 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. 0022-1767/18/$35.00

spreading, intraluminal crawling, transmigration, abluminal crawling, and interstitial migration to sites of lesion (3, 4).

During these steps, neutrophil migration is coordinated differently depending on the environmental context. Spreading and abluminal crawling, representing motility on two-dimensional (2D) surfaces, are regulated by adhesive forces through b 2 integrins (CD11/CD18). Migration in three-dimensional (3D) environments, as in the event of interstitial migration, is low adhesive, mostly integrin independent, and relies solely on contractile and protrusive forces (5). In general, actin polymerization is essential for the protrusive formation of the leading edge of migrating cells, whereas contraction of the actomyosin network assists movement by retracting the back of the cell (5, 6). The process of establishing and maintaining the polarized cell morphology during migration is mediated by members of the Rho family of small GTPases; a regulatory feedback loop between Rac1 and 2, Cdc42, and RhoA mediates F-actin polymerization, persistence of the leading edge, and actomyosin contractility at the rear of the cell (7, 8). The formation of a lamellipodium depends upon proper recruitment and activation of myosin L chain (9). Myosin L chain is part of a multiprotein complex named nonmuscle myosin class II (NMII). There exist three isoforms of NMII in mammalian cells, termed NMIIA, B, and C (10). All NMII isoforms occur as dimers composed of two H chains, two regulatory L chains, and two essential L chains. The H chain defines the isoform of the protein, namely Myh9 for NMIIA, Myh10 for NMIIB, and Myh14 for NMIIC (11). Neutrophils express only Myh9 and represent, among the leukocytes, the cells with the highest expression of this protein (12). During the process of neutrophil differentiation, Myh9 is highly upregulated, suggesting a particular functional importance of the molecule in this cell type (13, 14).

To date, the functional analysis of the role of Myh9 in neutrophil migration is restricted to the use of the pharmacological inhibitors

2,3-butanedione monoxime (BDM) and blebbistatin. BDM operates as ATPase and therefore affects the activity of myosins and many nonmyosin proteins, whereas blebbistatin blocks NMII proteins more specifically (15-17). Treatment of human neutrophil-like differentiated HL60 cells with blebbistatin suggested a role of NMIIA in the maintenance of membrane tension during establishment of the leading-edge protrusion and in the prevention of secondary pseudopods in 2D environments (18). Treatment of human neutrophils with blebbistatin compromised tail retraction during transmigration through a TNFa -activated endothelial monolayer (19). Similarly, studies with murine neutrophils using the inhibitor BDM as well as blebbistatin revealed a tail retraction defect and proposed the activation of NMIIA through the RhoA-ROCK or the Ca 2+ -MLCK axis during 2D migration under static conditions (7, 8, 20). Furthermore, in confined 3D environment, blebbistatin studies in murine neutrophils suggested that uropod contractility relied on NMIIA to squeeze the nucleus through sites of constrictions (5). However, the employment of the inhibitors bears limitations, which obliges us to take the results of previously conducted studies with caution. Recently, genetic approaches using cell-specific Myh9 knockouts for T cells and dendritic cells were reported. These studies found the accumulation of Myh9 at the rear of T cells during transmigration to be crucial to squeeze the nucleus through sites of constriction (21). In addition, Myh9 conditional knockout in T cells impaired the turnover of adhesion sites, resulting in increased adhesion and impaired interstitial migration in vivo (22). In addition, Myh9 was found to be important for the disassembly of binding between LFA-1 and ICAM-1 and retraction of the membrane at the rear of the T cell (23). In dendritic cells, spatiotemporal regulation of Myh9 was required for migration and Ag capture (24). However, genetic studies were still missing for neutrophils, the first responders at sites of inflammation. Therefore, this study set out to decipher the functional impact of Myh9 for neutrophil migration using genetic downregulation of Myh9 in the hematopoietic system employing the Vav-iCre system in mice. Whereas the complete knockout of Myh9 in the hematopoietic system was lethal, Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice were viable and fertile. In this model, Myh9 was found to be required for different migration steps of the neutrophil recruitment cascade. Under physiological flow conditions, pharmacological inhibition as well as genetic downregulation of Myh9 in neutrophils isolated from Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice resulted in profound defects in mechanotactic and chemotactic crawling and transmigration. Furthermore, neutrophils from Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice showed diminished migration in confined 3D environment compared with neutrophils from Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl mice. In a laser-induced skin injury model of sterile inflammation in the ear and in a peritonitis model, neutrophil extravasation and migration were significantly decreased in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice compared with control animals. Investigation of neutrophil extravasation in bone marrow chimeric mice during peritonitis revealed a cell intrinsic mechanism causing the migration defect of neutrophils upon Myh9 downregulation. Using neutrophils derived from the immortalized hematopoietic progenitor cell line Hoxb8-stem cell factor (SCF) of wild type (WT) mice, we were able to demonstrate that these cells represent a valid tool to study neutrophil trafficking in vitro. Similar to freshly isolated neutrophils, Hoxb8-SCF cellderived neutrophils (dHoxb8 cells), generated from fetal liver cells with a Myh9 knockdown (KD) (Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells), revealed 2D and 3D migration defects that could be rescued by expression of Myh9-EGFP (Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells). Live cell imaging of Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells during 3D migration revealed an enrichment of Myh9-EGFP not only in the uropod of

fast migrating cells, but also in withdrawing branching lamellipodia. We elucidated the underlying mechanism of the migration defect upon Myh9 downregulation and discovered a dysregulation of F-actin dynamics. In conclusion, the defects in different migratory modes of neutrophils, namely 2D migration, transmigration, and 3D migration, indicate the fundamental importance of Myh9 for neutrophil migration in innate immunity.

## Materials and Methods

Mice

Myh9 flox/flox mice [stock no. 36749-JAX (25); The Jackson Laboratory] were crossed into Vav-iCre + mice [stock no. 018968 (26); The Jackson Laboratory]. Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice were used as target animals, and littermates and age matched, cohoused Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl or Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/wt mice were used as controls. The genotypes of the mice were confirmed by PCR as described in the associated genotyping protocols of The Jackson Laboratory. An additional genotyping PCR was performed using the forward primer 5 -CCTTACCCCAGGTTTCAGGT-3 9 9 and the reverse primer 5 9 CAGGCATGGAGTTTGTGATG-3 . Mice were 9 bred and housed under specific pathogen-free conditions. Both male and female mice from the age of 8 wk were used in the experiments. Leukocyte counts were determined in whole blood obtained from vena maxillaris and vena temporalis superficialis using an IDEXX ProCyte Dx hematology analyzer (IDEXX Laboratories). Animal experiments were conducted in accordance with German federal animal protection laws and were approved by the Bavarian government (Regierung von Oberbayern, Munich, Germany).

Abs

For flow cytometry, PE-labeled anti-CD11a (clone 2D7; BD Biosciences), PE-labeled anti-CD11b (clone M1/70; eBioscience), PE- or FITC-labeled anti-CD18 (clone C71/16; BD Biosciences), PerCP-e710-labeled antiLy6G (clone 1A8-Ly6G; eBioscience), FITC-labeled anti-Gr-1 (clone RB6-8C5; BD Biosciences), Alexa Fluor 647-labeled anti-CXCR2 (clone TG11; BioLegend), PE-Cy7-labeled anti-CD44 (clone IM5; eBioscience), PerCP-eF710-labeled anti-c-kit (clone 2B8; eBioscience), allophycocyanin-labeled anti-CD34 (clone RAM34; eBioscience), anti-Myh9 (clone H11, Covance no. MMS-460R; BioLegend), and the Alexa Fluor 488conjugated goat anti-mouse IgM were used. For Western blotting, antiMyh9 (no. 3403; Cell Signaling Technology), anti-Gapdh (clone 6C5; Merck Millipore), anti-GFP (clone FL; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), antiActin (clone I19; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and secondary IRDye 680RD Donkey anti-Mouse (P/N 925-68072, LI-COR Biosciences), RDye 800CW Donkey anti-Rabbit (P/N 925-32213, LI-COR Biosciences), and IRDye 680RD Donkey anti-Rabbit (P/N 925-68073, LI-COR Biosciences) were used in 5% nonfat dry milk in TBST. For confocal microscopy, Myh9 was stained using the anti-Myh9 (catalog no. 3403; Cell Signaling Technology) primary Ab and the Alexa Fluor 546- or 488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG F(ab )2 9 fragment (Thermo Fisher Scientific). To stain F-actin, 100 nM SiR-actin (Spirochrome) was added to living cells for 24 h prior to experiments.

## Cells, cell culture, and isolation of bone marrow neutrophils

Murine WEHI-3B cells (ACC26) and murine embryonic fibroblast NIH-3T3 cells (ACC59) were obtained from the German Resource Centre for Biological Material. Human embryonic kidney HEK-293T cells (CRL-11268) and brain-derived b.End3 endothelial cells (CRL-2299) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. SCF-producing Chinese hamster ovary cells were kindly provided by H. Ha cker (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN). The cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 (SigmaAldrich) or DMEM plus GlutaMAX-I (b.End3 cells; Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% FCS (Biochrom) and 1% penicillin/ streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Murine bone marrow neutrophils were isolated via a discontinuous Percoll density gradient, as described previously (27, 28), and cultured for 24 h in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 20% WEHI-3B-conditioned medium. For May-Gru nwald-Giemsa staining, cytospins of isolated neutrophils or Hoxb8-SCF cells were stained with May-Gru nwald solution (Merck Millipore) and subsequently stained with a 12% Giemsa solution (Merck Millipore). Microscopy was conducted using a 63 3 /1.4 numerical aperture (NA) oil immersion objective (Leica). To inhibit Myh9 activity pharmacologically, isolated neutrophils were incubated with 1, 5, 15, 25, or 50 m M para -nitro blebbistatin (pn-blebbistatin; Optopharma) or in DMSO for 30 min at 37˚C prior to the experiments. The concentration was kept at the indicated concentration throughout the assays. DMSO with 0.1% final concentration was used as control.

## Generation of Hoxb8-SCF cells and differentiation to neutrophil-like cells

The plasmids pMSCVneo-ER-Hoxb8 and pCL-Eco were kindly provided by H. Ha cker (29) (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital). Hoxb8-SCF cells were generated as described previously (30). Briefly, HEK-293T cells were transfected with the retroviral backbone pMSCVneo-ER-Hoxb8 and the ecotropic packaging vector pCL-Eco using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Virus-containing supernatant was harvested 48 h posttransfection, and the CFU per milliliter was titrated on NIH-3T3 cells. Bone marrow cells of 8- to 10-wk-old mice or fetal liver cells of embryonic day (E)13 embryos were harvested, and progenitor cells were enriched by a HISTOPAQUE-1083 (Sigma-Aldrich) gradient. The progenitor cells were cultured in stem cell medium consisting of RPMI 1640 supplemented with 15% FCS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 10 ng/ml recombinant murine (rm) IL-3 (PeproTech), 20 ng/ml rmIL-6 (PeproTech), and 2% SCF-containing supernatant. The SCF-containing supernatant was produced by Chinese hamster ovary cells, as mentioned above. After 72 h, the progenitor cells were transduced with the retrovirus at a multiplicity of infection of 10 by spinoculation with Lipofectamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in progenitor outgrowth medium consisting of RPMI 1640 containing 10% FCS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1 m M b -estradiol (Sigma-Aldrich), 30 m M 2-ME (PanReac AppliChem), and 2% SCF-containing supernatant. The Hoxb8-SCF cell line was established after 4 wk by culture in progenitor outgrowth medium. Differentiation of Hoxb8-SCF cells toward neutrophils was allowed by culture for 4 d in differentiation medium consisting of RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 20 ng/ml rmG-CSF (PeproTech), and 2% SCF-containing supernatant.

## Stable transduction of Hoxb8-SCF cells

The murine Myosin-IIA-GFP vector was a gift from M. Krummel (plasmid no. 38297; Addgene) (23). The pMSCV-Puro vector was provided by H. Ha cker (St. Jude Children's Research Hospital). For viral transduction, the coding region of Myosin-IIA-GFP was cloned into the retroviral backbone pMSCV-Puro . Virus was generated by transfection of HEK-293T cells with pMSCV-PuroMyosin-II-A-GFP and pCL-Eco using Lipofectamine 2000. Virus-containing supernatant was harvested 48 h posttransfection, and Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells, generated from Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl fetal liver cells, were transduced by spinoculation using Lipofectamine. Upon 72 h posttransduction, puromycinresistant cells were selected for the length of 7 d. Cells were sorted according to their expression of EGFP using a MoFlo Astrios cell sorter (Beckman Coulter). The expression of the Myh9-EGFP fusion protein in Hoxb8-SCF cells was analyzed by Western blotting and flow cytometry.

## Flow cytometry

To evaluate the upregulation of integrins of Hoxb8-SCF cells, the cells were stimulated for 20 min at 37˚C with 100 ng/ml rmTNFa (PeproTech), 100 ng/ml rmCXCL1 (PeproTech), 100 nM PMA (Sigma-Aldrich), or 100 nM N -formylMet-Ile-Val-Ile-Leu (fMIVIL) (31) (JPT Peptide Technologies) or left untreated for negative control. To determine the expression of cell surface proteins, whole blood, isolated neutrophils, or Hoxb8-SCF cells were stained with the indicated fluorescence-labeled Abs or the corresponding isotype controls in PBS supplemented with 1% FCS for 30 min on ice. RBCs were removed using FACS Lysing Solution (BD Biosciences). Labeled cells were kept on ice and acquired immediately on a FACSCanto II or a LSRFortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Fluorescence intensities were measured, and mean fluorescence intensities were determined using FlowJo v10 software (Tree Star). Dead cells were excluded before gating on the target populations.

## Western blotting

Isolated neutrophils or Hoxb8-SCF cells were incubated in lysis buffer consisting of 25 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM sodium chloride, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM DTT, and 1 3 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) (32) for 30 min on ice, and protein concentration was determined using the Qubit system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were separated by 8% SDS-PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes using wet or semidry blotting techniques. Membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk in TBS for 1 h and probed with Abs against Myh9, Gapdh, and GFP overnight at 4˚C. Corresponding secondary Abs were added for 1 h. Immunoblots were imaged using the Odyssey CLx (LI-COR Biosciences).

## Microscopy

Analysis of subcellular distribution of Myh9 and F-actin in vitro was performed using confocal laser scanning microscopy and stimulated emission

depletion (STED) nanoscopy at the bioimaging core facility of the Biomedical Center at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universita t Munchen. HEK-293T cells were grown on a gelatin-treated cover slip, and fixed with 4% formaldehyde solution in PBS, and isolated neutrophils from Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl and control mice were exposed to immobilized rmICAM-1 (3 m g/ml; STEMCELL Technologies) and immobilized rmCXCL1 (5 m g/ml; PeproTech). Samples were permeabilized and blocked with 0.3% Triton X-100 and 5% BSA, and Abs were incubated in a 0.1% Triton X-100, 1% BSA solution. Samples were mounted using PermaFluor (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Images were taken using a Leica SP8 X White Light Laser confocal microscope equipped with a 63 3 /1.40 oil immersion objective (Leica). STED nanoscopy was conducted using a Leica TCS SP8 X White Light Laser STED microscope equipped with a 100 3 /1.4 NA oil immersion objective, depletion in xy direction at 592 and 775 nm, and sequential recording (Leica). Images were analyzed offline using LAS X software (Leica) and ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). Myh9 and F-actin distribution to the front or the back of the cell was determined by taking the sum of intensity values of the whole cell area and calculating the ratio between this value and the sum of intensity values of the front or the back of the cell. To determine the spatial correlation between F-actin and Myh9, a randomization approach using the nearestneighbor analysis was performed with the MosaicIA Fiji plugin (https:// imagej.net/Interaction\_Analysis) to calculate the interaction potentials (33, 34). Potential used was Plummer (10 iterations). Grid spacing was 0.5 pixels. Kernel wt(q) was 0.001. Kernel wt(p) was provided by the plugin using Silverman rule. Interaction strength . 0 indicated that the spatial distribution of F-actin was dependent on the spatial distribution of Myh9. The results were tested for significance against 1000 Monte Carlo samples of point distributions corresponding to the null hypothesis of 'no interaction.' Quantification of the interaction strength was performed using only results that were considered statistically significant ( p , 0.05).

Analysis of Myh9-EGFP-expressing dHoxb8 cells (Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells) and the subcellular localization of Myh9 and F-actin in real time was performed in 3D environment during migration as described in the section 3D chemotaxis assay, using an upright spinning disk confocal microscope (Examiner; Zeiss) equipped with a confocal scanner unit CSU-X1 (Yokogawa Electric), an Evolve 512 EMCCD camera (Photometrics), and a 20 3 /0.75 NA water immersion objective (Plan-Apochromat; Zeiss). F-actin was stained with SiR-actin (100 nM; Spirochrome) 24 h prior to the experiment (35). Images were acquired using two lasers with an excitation wavelength of 488 and 561 nm. Data were analyzed offline using Slidebook 6.0.8 Software (3i) and Fiji/ImageJ. Myh9 distribution to the front or the back of the cell was determined as described above.

## Static adhesion assay

Wells of a 96-well microtiter plate were coated with 3 m g/ml rmICAM-1 (STEMCELL Technologies) or 50 m g/ml murine fibrinogen (Innovative Research) overnight at 4˚C and washed with PBS. Hoxb8-SCF cells were plated in triplicates in adhesion medium consisting of HBSS (Biochrom) plus 20 mM Hepes (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.25% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% glucose (Sigma-Aldrich), 1.2 mM Ca 2+ and 1 mM Mg 2+ (Sigma-Aldrich) at 1 3 10 5 cells per well. Cells were allowed to settle for 5 min at 37˚C and stimulated for 5 min with 100 ng/ml rmTNFa , 100 ng/ml rmCXCL1, 100 nM PMA, or 100 nM fMIVIL final concentrations or left untreated for negative control. Nonadherent cells were washed away, and adherent cells were fixed with 1% glutaraldehyde and stained with 0.1% crystal violet solution (Sigma-Aldrich). Absorption at 590 nm was measured with a microplate reader (Tecan) after lysis of cells with 10% acetic acid solution, as previously described (36). All samples were normalized to the untreated control cells.

## Flow chamber assays

Toanalyze induction of adhesion of isolated neutrophils and dHoxb8 cells under flow conditions, m -slides VI 0.1 (ibidi) were coated with 10 m g/ml rmP-selectin (isolated neutrophils; Holzel Diagnostika) or 5 m g/ml rmP-selectin (dHoxb8 cells), 3 m g/ml rmICAM-1, and 5 m g/ml rmCXCL1. Cells (7.5 3 10 /ml) in 5 adhesion medium were perfused into the channels for the duration of 9 min at a constant shear stress of 1 dyne/cm . Using an Axiovert 200M microscope 2 equipped with a Plan-Apochromat 20 3 /0.75 NA objective, AxioCam HR digital camera, and a temperature-controlled environmental chamber (Zeiss), time-lapse videos were recorded from 18 different points of view. The number of rolling and adherent cells after 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 min was determined offline using Image J software (National Institutes of Health) as described previously (37). Cells were defined as adherent when the cell arrested longer than 15 s at the same spot.

To study mechanotactic crawling under shear stress, m -slides VI 0.1 (ibidi) were coated with 3 m g/ml rmICAM-1 and 5 m g/ml rmCXCL1. The chambers were filled with cells (4 3 10 5 per sample) in adhesion medium

and were allowed to adhere for 10 min (isolated neutrophils) or 5 min (dHoxb8 cells). Shear stress of 1 dyne/cm 2 was applied for 10 min, and time-lapse videos were recorded as described above. Migration tracks were analyzed offline with the ImageJ software and its implemented manual tracking plugin (Fabrice Cordelie 's, Institute Curie). Single-cell migration tracks and rose plots were generated using the ibidi Chemotaxis software. Spreading and polarization were studied by measuring the cell area and circularity under static conditions 10 min after stimulation.

## 2D chemotaxis assay

Chemotactic behavior of dHoxb8 cells was examined in a Zigmond chamber as described previously (38, 39). Briefly, glass coverslips were coated with 12.5 m g/ml rmICAM-1, blocked with 10% casein, and washed with PBS. Cells (4 3 10 5 per sample) in adhesion medium were applied to the coverslip and allowed to adhere for 10 min at 37˚C, and coverslips were placed onto the Zigmond slides. To induce chemotaxis, 100 ng/ml rmCXCL1 was applied to one side of the chamber and after stabilization of the gradient for 10 min, time-lapse videos were taken for 10 min using the microscope system described above. Cell migration parameters were determined using the ImageJ and the ibidi Chemotaxis software.

## Transwell migration assay

Neutrophils (2.5 3 10 5 per sample) in adhesion medium were seeded in triplicates in the upper wells of polycarbonate membrane chambers (Corning). These were either coated with 3 m g/ml rmICAM-1, when a pore size of 3.0 m m was used, or a monolayer of brain-derived b.End3 endothelial cells, when a pore size of 8.0 m m was used. Neutrophils were allowed to migrate for 70 min (rmICAM-1) or 45 min (b.End3 cells) at 37˚C in the presence of 100 ng/ml rmCXCL1 in the lower compartment or vehicle for control. Transmigrated neutrophils were either quantified on a FACSCanto II or LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences) or counted under the microscope in suspension. All samples were normalized to the transmigrated control cells in the presence of rmCXCL1 (100%).

## 3D chemotaxis assay

The analysis of migration in collagen gels was performed in m -slide chemotaxis chambers (ibidi) as previously described (40). A gel-cell mixture consisting of 3 3 10 5 cells in 1.5 mg/ml type I rat tail collagen (ibidi) was applied to the middle channel of the 3D chamber and left at 37˚C for 5 min for gelation. After application of 100 ng/ml rmCXCL1 for 20 min at 37˚C, time-lapse videos were recorded for the length of 10 min using a Plan-Apochromat 10 3 /0.3 NA objective and the previously described microscope system. Migration tracks were analyzed offline with the Image J software. Single-cell migration tracks and rose plots were generated using the ibidi Chemotaxis software.

## CXCL1-induced peritonitis model

Vav-iCre + / Myh9 wt/fl and control mice or bone marrow chimeras (as indicated below) were injected i.p. with 300 ng rmCXCL1 or 0.9% NaCl for negative control. After 4 h, mice were sacrificed and peritoneal lavage was performed with 0.9% NaCl. The number of extravasated neutrophils in the lavage was determined using an IDEXX ProCyte Dx hematology analyzer (IDEXX Laboratories).

## Bone marrow chimeras

Bone marrow cells from WT CD45.1-expressing mice and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl CD45.2-expressing mice were harvested, and a total of 10 3 10 6 cells per recipient were injected via the tail vein into lethally irradiated CD45.1-expressing WT mice. Cortrimoxazol was given for 4 wk after transplantation to prevent infections. Three different chimeric models were generated (donor → recipient): WT CD45.1 → WT CD45.1 (WT → WT); Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl CD45.2 → WT CD45.1 (Het → WT), and WT CD45.1/ Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl CD45.2 (1:1 ratio) → WT CD45.1 (Mix → WT). Mice were included into experiments 8 wk after bone marrow transplantation.

## Intravital two-photon microscopy

Neutrophil extravasation and interstitial migration during inflammation was investigated by two-photon microscopy using a laser-induced ear injury model of sterile inflammation (41). Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl target mice and Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl control mice were anesthetized, and the ears were fixed on a custom build stage. PE-labeled anti-Ly6G (30 m g, clone 1A8Ly6g; eBioscience) and FITC-dextran (20 m g; Thermo Fisher Scientific) were injected via a tail vein catheter. Laser injury was induced by focusing the laser beam on a field of 40 3 40 m m until autofluorescence appeared, leading to a single necrotic lesion within the dermis (42, 43).

Images were acquired using a TriM Scope II (LaVision BioTec) connected to an upright microscope with a 20 3 /0.95W water immersion objective (Olympus), excitation 800 nm, emission filters 525/50 and 605/70, and second harmonics. Size of the field of view was 554 3 554 m m, frame rate was 30 s, and z-step size was 3 m m in a total range of 30 m m (20-50 m m below the epidermis). After acquisition, images were processed and analyzed offline using Fiji/ImageJ. Interstitial migration velocity and Euclidean distance were determined during the observation time by manual tracking. Extravasation of neutrophils was analyzed for 40 min after induction of laser injury by measuring extravascular PE intensities within a circular area of interest, defined by the border of the laser injury to the border of the nearest vessel. Quantification of neutrophil extravasation was performed by calculating the fold change of the sum of intensity values relative to the background intensity immediately after injury.

## Statistical analysis

Data shown represent means 6 SEM and are representative or compiled from at least three independent experiments as indicated. Statistical significance was determined by Student t test or one-way ANOVA with the Holm-Sidak method or the Dunnett method, respectively, using SigmaPlot 12.5 (Systat Software) or GraphPad Prism 6 (GraphPad Sofware). A p value , 0.05 was considered significant.

## Results

Pharmacological inhibition of Myh9 compromised mechanotactic crawling and transmigration of isolated murine neutrophils in vitro

To investigate the role of Myh9 for neutrophil recruitment under physiological conditions, we analyzed freshly isolated murine neutrophils in microflow chambers coated with immobilized rmP-selectin, rmICAM-1, and rmCXCL1 under flow conditions (1 dyne/cm ). In this study, treatment with 50 2 m M pn-blebbistatin did not affect neutrophil rolling and adhesion (Fig. 1A) but resulted in neutrophils with multiple pseudopods after spreading for 10 min even before the onset of flow (Fig. 1B), as expected (8). In addition, an increased cell area and reduced circularity compared with DMSO-treated neutrophils were observed. During migration under flow conditions, pn-blebbistatin-treated neutrophils showed an elongated cell shape with a long uropod (Fig. 1C) and impaired mechanotactic migration, as revealed in single-cell migration tracks (Fig. 1D). Quantitative analysis revealed significantly reduced migration velocity and Euclidean distance during mechanotactic migration (Fig. 1E). Here, treatment with increasing concentrations of pn-blebbistatin identified a dose-dependent effect of pn-blebbistatin on the migration velocity. Transmigration of murine neutrophils in rmICAM-1-coated Transwells through 3 m m pores toward a gradient of rmCXCL1 was severely reduced in presence of pn-blebbistatin compared with untreated murine neutrophils (100%, Fig. 1F). Thus, these results suggest an important role of Myh9 in mechanotactic migration and transmigration of neutrophils.

Diminished Myh9 expression of isolated murine V av-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils resulted in impaired mechanotactic crawling, transmigration, and 3D migration

As the global knockout of Myh9 is lethal at day E7.5 (44), we crossed Myh9 fl/fl mice with Vav-iCre + mice to generate a hematopoietic cell-specific Myh9 knockout (26). Here, Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice, Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl mice, and Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 fl/fl were born, but no Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl mice from 10 mating pairs with an offspring of 119 pups over 12 mo were found. This result led to the conclusion that a hematopoietic cell-specific Myh9 knockout was lethal, which could be due to the role of Myh9 in hematopoiesis, cell division, and cell survival of CD34 + progenitor cells (14, 44). Thus, we were unable to conduct experiments using murine neutrophils with a complete lack of Myh9 protein expression.

FIGURE 1. Pharmacological inhibition of Myh9 by pn-blebbistatin compromises mechanotactic crawling and transmigration of freshly isolated murine neutrophils. ( A ) Rolling and adhesion of DMSO- and pn-blebbistatin-treated neutrophils under flow conditions (1 dyne/cm ) in microflow chambers coated 2 with immobilized rmP-selectin, rmICAM-1, and rmCXCL1 at indicated times ( n = 5). NS, DMSO- versus pn-blebbistatin-treated adherent neutrophils. pn-blebbistatin, 50 m M. ( B E -) Spreading and mechanotactic migration of DMSO- and pn-blebbistatin-treated neutrophils under flow conditions (1 dyne/cm ) 2 using microflow chambers coated with immobilized rmICAM-1 and rmCXCL1. pn-blebbistatin, 50 m M, unless indicated otherwise ( n $ 3). ( B ) Spreading upon exposure to immobilized rmICAM-1 and rmCXCL1 for 10 min in the absence of flow, calculated by measuring the cell area and the circularity ( n = 223 DMSO-treated neutrophils, 275 pn-blebbistatin-treated neutrophils of four independent experiments). Scale bar, 10 m m. ( C ) Representative time-lapse images of migrating neutrophils under flow conditions at indicated time points. Scale bar, 10 m m. ( D ) Single-cell migration tracks after 10 min of flow. Arrows indicate direction of flow. Representative single-cell migration tracks ( n = 422 DMSO-treated neutrophils, 563 pn-blebbistatin-treated neutrophils of four independent experiments). ( E ) Mean migration velocity and mean Euclidean distance. ( F ) Quantitative analysis of transmigrated DMSO- and pn-blebbistatin-treated neutrophils in rmICAM-1-coated Transwell chambers (3 m m pores) toward a gradient of rmCXCL1 (100 ng/ml) or without stimulus ( 2 ). Transmigrated neutrophils were normalized to DMSO-treated cells in the presence of rmCXCL1 (100%). pn-blebbistatin, 50 m M ( n = 4). Data represent mean 6 SEM. ** p , 0.01.

<!-- image -->

However, Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice were viable, and maturation of neutrophils isolated from the bone marrow of Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice was similar as assessed by the nuclear shape and expression of the neutrophil markers Ly6G, CD11b, and CXCR2 (Fig. 2A, 2B). We analyzed the remaining Myh9 protein expression in neutrophils isolated from Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice and found a strong reduction of Myh9 protein expression down to 25% compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl animals (100%, Fig. 2C). To test whether the diminished Myh9 expression had an impact on neutrophil trafficking, we analyzed Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils and Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils for control in microflow chambers and Transwell assays. In contrast to pn-blebbistatin-treated neutrophils, the cell shape of

Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils was not affected in the absence or presence of flow compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils (Fig. 2D, 2E). However, Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils presented an impaired migration behavior as illustrated by single-cell migration tracks and quantitative analysis of the migration velocity and the Euclidean distance under flow conditions compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils (Fig. 2F, 2G). In addition, the transmigration of Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils in rmICAM1-coated Transwells through 3 m m pores as well as through b. End3-coated Transwells with 8 m m membrane pores was significantly compromised compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils (100%, Fig. 2H).

FIGURE 2. Diminished Myh9 expression compromises mechanotactic crawling and transmigration of freshly isolated murine Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils. ( A ) Representative microscopic images of neutrophils freshly isolated from the bone marrow of Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl control mice and Vav-iCre + / Myh9 wt/fl target mice. May-Gru nwald-Giemsa staining. Scale bar, 10 m m. ( B ) Differentiation profile of neutrophils freshly isolated from the bone marrow of Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice. Expression of Ly6G, CD11b, and CXCR2 was analyzed by flow cytometry using specific fluorescently labeled Abs. Mean fluorescence intensity ( n = 4). ( C ) Representative Western blot (left panel) and quantitative analysis (Figure legend continues)

<!-- image -->

Similarly, studying 3D chemotactic migration of Vav-iCre + / Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils in rat tail collagen networks (1.5 mg/ml) toward a gradient of rmCXCL1 revealed a reduction of migration velocity and Euclidean distance compared with Vav-iCre 2 / Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils (Fig. 3A). Rose plots and the analysis of directness and forward migration index revealed that Vav-iCre + / Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils could still sense and orient toward the chemotactic gradient (Fig. 3B, 3C). Thus, not only 2D migration was defective, but also transmigration and 3D migration, pointing toward a fundamental role of Myh9 in neutrophil migration.

To explore the mechanism causing the migration defect, we set out to decipher the actomyosin dynamics during migration of Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils, as F-actin polymerization in the leading edge and contraction of the actomyosin network at the uropod are essential during neutrophil migration (5, 6). We analyzed the subcellular distribution of Myh9 in relation to F-actin during neutrophil migration on immobilized rmICAM-1 and rmCXCL1 using STED nanoscopy (Fig. 3D). Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils localized Myh9 at the lamellipodium and at the rear of the cell, where it specifically colocalized with F-actin. Neutrophils of Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice localized their remaining Myh9 mainly at the rear of the cell in one single spot, resulting in a strong reduction of F-actin colocalization. Furthermore, F-actin enrichment in the lamellipodium was reduced, although the protein amount of G-actin in both Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils was similar (Fig. 3E). Quantitative analysis confirmed the shift of F-actin and Myh9 to the back of Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils (Fig. 3F, 3G). These data suggested that a downregulation of Myh9 resulted in dysregulated F-actin and Myh9 dynamics. To prove this concept, we analyzed if F-actin distributed randomly or dependent on Myh9 using a statistical randomization approach (33, 34) (Fig. 3H). Here, the interaction strength is a measure of the degree of dependence between F-actin and Myh9 distribution. If the value is above zero, the spatial distribution of F-actin is dependent on the spatial distribution of Myh9. In Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils, the interaction strength was 7.7 6 2.0 in the back and 7.8 6 0.9 in the front of the cell. In Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils, the interaction strength for F-actin/Myh9 in the front of the cell was significantly reduced to 3.5 6 0.9 compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils. The randomization approach to test for F-actin/Myh9 interaction strength during migration of neutrophils revealed that in sharp contrast to normal Myh9 expression, the downregulation of Myh9 caused a distance distribution between F-actin and Myh9 (blue line) similar to the probability density function (context, red line), representing the null hypothesis that F-actin was distributed randomly and independent of Myh9. In conclusion, these data suggested

that F-actin distribution within the cell was dependent on a certain threshold of Myh9 and that the downregulation of Myh9 resulted in disturbed F-actin dynamics in the front of the cell, potentially leading to an impaired migration of neutrophils.

## Myh9 was critical for neutrophil extravasation in vivo

To analyze the physiological relevance of Myh9 for neutrophil trafficking during inflammation in vivo, we analyzed neutrophil extravasation in a laser-induced skin injury model of sterile inflammation in the ear and an rmCXCL1-induced peritonitis model using Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice and Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl control animals (Fig. 4A-C). Neutrophil extravasation upon laserinduced skin injury was significantly reduced in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice 40 min after infliction of the injury compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl control mice (Fig. 4A). Furthermore, extravasated Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils presented a significantly slower migration velocity and impaired Euclidean distance compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils, indicating a significant role of Myh9 for neutrophil migration during sterile inflammation in the ear model (Fig. 4B). In the peritonitis model, the rmCXCL1 injection induced a profound extravasation of 3.25 3 10 6 6 0.20 Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils into the inflamed peritoneum compared with 0.32 3 10 6 6 0.12 Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils that were present in the peritoneal cavity upon 0.9% NaCl injection (Fig. 4C). In contrast, only 0.82 3 10 6 6 0.36 Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils extravasated into the peritoneal cavity upon rmCXCL1 stimulation compared with 0.25 3 10 6 6 0.13 transmigrated neutrophils in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice upon 0.9% NaCl injection. Thus, the number of extravasated neutrophils in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice was significantly lower compared with the number of extravasated neutrophils in Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl mice upon stimulation with rmCXCL1. The total WBC and differential leukocyte counts in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice were similar to Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl control animals (Fig. 4D). Moreover, we performed the rmCXCL1-induced peritonitis model in bone marrow chimeras by using WT mice that received bone marrow cells of 1) WT mice (WT → WT), 2) Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice (Het → WT), and 3) WT/ Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice (1:1 ratio) (Mix → WT). To test for the successful bone marrow engraftment, we analyzed the WBC and differential leukocyte counts in all three chimeric mice models and found slightly increased WBC and neutrophil cell counts in the Het → WT chimeric mice compared with the cell counts of WT → WT chimeric mice (Fig. 4E). Using the CD45 congenic marker system with CD45.1 WT and CD45.2 Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice, we were able to identify 100% CD45.1 neutrophils in WT → WT chimeras, 97% CD45.2 neutrophils in Het → WT chimeras, and 48% CD45.1 and 52% CD45.2 neutrophils in Mix → WT chimeras, as expected,

(right panel) of Myh9 expression in neutrophil lysates of Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl control mice and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl target mice. Protein expression of Myh9 was normalized to the amount of Gapdh protein expression ( Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl mice 100%) ( n = 3). ( D G -) Spreading and mechanotactic migration of Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils under flow conditions (1 dyne/cm ) using microflow chambers coated with immobilized rmICAM-1 2 and rmCXCL1 ( n = 3). ( D ) Spreading upon exposure to immobilized rmICAM-1 and rmCXCL1 for 10 min in the absence of flow, calculated by measuring the cell area and the circularity ( n = 95 Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils, 74 Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils of three independent experiments). ( E ) Representative time-lapse images of migrating Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils under flow conditions at indicated time points. Scale bar, 10 m m. ( F ) Single-cell migration tracks after 10 min of flow. Arrows indicate direction of flow. Representative single-cell migration tracks ( n = 322 Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils, 273 Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils of three independent experiments). ( G ) Mean migration velocity and mean Euclidean distance. ( H ) Quantitative analysis of transmigrated Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils in rmICAM-1-coated Transwell chambers (3 m m pores, left panel, n = 3) or b.End3-coated Transwell chambers (8 m m pores, right panel, n = 4) toward a gradient of rmCXCL1 (100 ng/ml) or without stimulus ( 2 ). Transmigrated neutrophils were normalized to Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils in the presence of rmCXCL1 (100%). Data represent mean 6 SEM. ** p , 0.01, *** p , 0.001.

FIGURE 3. Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils show defects in 3D chemotactic migration and impaired F-actin dynamics upon Myh9 downregulation. ( A C -) Migration of Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils toward gradients of 100 ng/ml rmCXCL1 in 3D collagen networks (1.5 mg/ml) for 10 min ( n = 3). ( A ) Mean migration velocity and mean Euclidean distance. ( B ) Rose diagrams. The area of each sector is proportional to the frequency of the migration vectors of tracked Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils pointed in the respective direction in response to gradients of rmCXCL1. Triangles indicate orientation of gradients ( n = 441 Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils, 386 Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils of three independent experiments). ( C ) Directness (Euclidean distance divided by accumulated distance indicating the straightness of migration) and forward migration index (efficiency of the forward migration of the cells in direction of the x -axis). ( D G -) Migrating Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils on immobilized rmICAM-1 and rmCXCL1 were imaged using STED nanoscopy ( n = 8 Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and n = 5 Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils). ( D ) Representative microscopic images (upper panel) of Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils (F-actin, magenta; Myh9, cyan; merge, white; scale bar, 10 m m) and intensity profiles (lower panel) of F-actin and Myh9 along the segmented line of representative neutrophil. F-actin, magenta; Myh9, cyan; arrows indicate the front of the neutrophil. ( E ) Quantitative analysis of Western blots of the actin expression in cell lysates from Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils. Protein expression of actin was normalized to the amount of Gapdh protein expression (Figure legend continues)

<!-- image -->

indicating the successful depletion of recipient bone marrow cells and engraftment of donor bone marrow cells (Fig. 4F). During rmCXCL1-induced peritonitis, WT → WT chimeras showed an extravasation of 4.86 3 10 6 6 0.49 neutrophils into the peritoneum compared with the extravasation of 0.90 3 10 6 6 0.45 neutrophils upon 0.9% NaCl injection (Fig. 4G). Similar to the results in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl mice, extravasation of neutrophils of Het → WT chimeras was significantly reduced upon rmCXCL1 injection compared with neutrophils in WT → WT chimeras, confirming the concept that Myh9 downregulation in leukocytes was critical for the observed recruitment defect. Interestingly, Mix → WT chimeras revealed a diminished neutrophil extravasation to the same extend as observed in Het → WT chimeras, indicating that the presence of WT neutrophils could not rescue the extravasation defect of Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils. Thus, the migration defect of Myh9 KD neutrophils was cell intrinsic. Taken together, our in vivo results demonstrated the fundamental importance of proper Myh9 protein expression for neutrophil trafficking in innate immunity.

## dHoxb8 cells represented a valid model for neutrophil trafficking

As breeding complications limited the genetic studies on the role of Myh9 for neutrophil migration, we analyzed Hoxb8-SCF cells for their potential to serve as a novel model for neutrophil trafficking with the possibility to perform essential rescue experiments (29). Upon differentiation, dHoxb8 cells showed the typical segmented nucleus, and they downregulated the progenitor markers CD34, Flt3, and c-kit and upregulated the neutrophil markers Gr-1, Ly6G, and CXCR2, similar to freshly isolated murine neutrophils (Fig. 5A-C). To test whether dHoxb8 cells are an eligible tool to study neutrophil recruitment, we analyzed the basal expression of the subunits of the b 2 integrins CD11a, CD11b, CD11c, and CD18. Here, the subunits CD11a and CD18 were constitutively expressed and CD11b expression was induced upon differentiation similar to freshly isolated murine neutrophils (Fig. 5D), whereas CD11c was barely detectable. Moreover, the surface expression of the b 2 integrin Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18) was upregulated upon stimulation with PMA, rmCXCL1, rmTNFa , or fMIVIL for 20 min in dHoxb8 cells but not in undifferentiated Hoxb8-SCF cells (Fig. 5E). Under static conditions, adhesion of dHoxb8 cells was significantly increased on rmICAM-1 upon stimulation with PMA, rmCXCL1, rmTNFa , and fMIVIL as well as on murine fibrinogen upon stimulation with PMA, rmCXCL1, and fMIVIL compared with unstimulated dHoxb8 cells (Fig. 5F). Undifferentiated Hoxb8-SCF cells were also able to adhere to rmICAM-1 when stimulated with PMA and rmTNFa , which may be due to the constitutive expression of LFA-1 (Fig. 5D, 5F). Furthermore, rolling and adhesion under flow conditions (1 dyne/cm ) of dHoxb8 cells were similar to that of freshly 2 isolated murine neutrophils (Fig. 5G). Additionally, dHoxb8 cells were able to perform mechanotactic migration toward and against the direction of flow (Fig. 5H) and chemotactic migration by sensing and migrating toward a gradient of rmCXCL1

(Fig. 5I). As the basic properties and phenotypical and functional characteristics of dHoxb8 cells were very similar to freshly isolated murine neutrophils (4, 37), we concluded that this model represents a useful tool to study neutrophil trafficking.

## Myh9-EGFP expression in Myh9 KD dHoxb8 cells rescued their migratory defect

For the generation of Hoxb8-SCF cell lines, embryos at day 13 were used to isolate fetal liver cells as described (30). Although no Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl mice were born, we were able to generate Hoxb8-SCF cell lines from fetal liver progenitor cells of Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl mice, Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice, and Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl mice. Genotyping of fetal liver cells was carried out using specific primers for Myh9 and Vav-iCre expression (Fig. 6A). Western blot analysis revealed a significant increase of Myh9 expression upon differentiation in Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells, as reported for bone marrow progenitors compared with peripheral blood neutrophils (Fig. 6B) (13, 14). However, residual expression of Myh9 was detected in undifferentiated Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells, as expected, but also in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells, leading to the conclusion that the knockout in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells was incomplete. Upon differentiation, both cell lines, Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells, were unable to upregulate Myh9 to levels of control Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 fl/fl dHoxb8 cells. To characterize the remaining Myh9 protein expression in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells, intracellular Myh9 expression was analyzed on a single cell level by flow cytometry (Fig. 6C). Here, we identified a significantly diminished expression of Myh9 in both Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells, compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 fl/fl dHoxb8 cells. However, all three cell lines presented a homogenous Myh9 expression with a single peak. Next, we developed a PCR genotyping strategy, by which the PCR primers bind outside of the floxed sites that flank exon1 of Myh9. Here, PCR products from WT Myh9 genomic DNA (gDNA) had a size of 1800 bp ( Myh9 wt ), those from floxed Myh9 gDNA had a size of 2000 bp ( Myh9 fl ), and those from floxed Myh9 gDNA lacking exon1 had a size of 230 bp ( Myh9 del ). As expected, genomic analysis of Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells at day 0 and day 4 showed a 2000 bp PCR product specific for Myh9 fl (Fig. 6D). PCR products of Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl Hoxb8-SCF cell gDNA at day 0 and day 4 showed both Myh9 wt and Myh9 del , as expected. Genomic analysis of Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells at day 0 and day 4 revealed that these cells deleted only one floxed Myh9 allele but kept the other one. This unexpected result was confirmed by sequencing of the PCR products (data not shown) and may explain that the remaining Myh9 protein expression in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8 cells was similar to the Myh9 protein expression in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells. Therefore, we defined both Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells as Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells. Proper differentiation of Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells was analyzed using control Hoxb8-SCF cells and Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells. Similar

FIGURE 4. Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils fail to extravasate during laser-induced ear injury and acute peritonitis in vivo. ( A and B ) Laserinduced sterile inflammation at the ear of Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice. Neutrophils were stained intravascularly for Ly6G using a specific fluorescently labeled Ab ( n = 5 for each strain). ( A ) Left panel, A representative image of laser-induced skin injury from the ear of a Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl mouse and neutrophil extravasation at 40 min. Small circle, area of laser-induced injury. Big circle, area of quantification for neutrophil extravasation from adjacent vessel, indicated by white lines. Scale bar, 10 m m. Neutrophils in pseudocolors, heat map = multicolored bar. Right panel, Quantification of neutrophil extravasation as fold increase of fluorescence intensity (FI) at indicated time points. ( B ) Mean migration velocity and mean Euclidean distance of interstitially migrating neutrophils ( n = 5 for each strain, $ 10 neutrophils per mouse). ( C ) Number of extravasated neutrophils within the peritoneal lavage 4 h after the i.p. injection of 0.9% NaCl or 300 ng rmCXCL1 into Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl (black circles) and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl (white circles) mice ( n = 3). ( D ) WBC and differential leukocyte counts of (Figure legend continues)

<!-- image -->

to freshly isolated murine neutrophils (compare Fig. 5), Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells show the same phenotypical characteristics as WT control Hoxb8-SCF cells regarding differentiation markers, adhesion molecules, and CXCR2 expression (data not shown).

To rescue the Myh9 expression in Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells, we transduced a Myh9-EGFP fusion protein into Myh9-KDHoxb8-SCF cells. We first analyzed the expression and correct colocalization of a Myh9-EGFP fusion protein with F-actin in HEK-293T cells (Fig. 6E). To test the transduction efficiency of the Myh9-EGFP viral construct (Fig. 6F, left panel), we transduced bone marrow-derived Hoxb8-SCF cells and gained 40.1% EGFP-positive cells with medium and 5.7% EGFP-positive cells with high fluorescence intensity (Fig. 6F, right panel). Myh9-KDHoxb8-SCF cells showed no EGFP fluorescence before transduction (Fig. 6G, left panel, 0%) but were positive for EGFP fluorescence after successful transduction (Fig. 6G, middle panel, 8.3%), which was increased after sorting of cells for fluorescent EGFP signal (Fig. 6G, right panel, 83.3%). Myh9-EGFPexpressing Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells were defined as Myh9rescue (RES)-Hoxb8-SCF cells. Western blot analysis confirmed the expression of endogenous Myh9 (red) in Myh9-KD-Hoxb8SCF cells before and after differentiation as well as the expression of Myh9-EGFP (green) only in Myh9-RES-Hoxb8-SCF cells before and after differentiation (Fig. 6H). Quantitative analysis of mechanotactic migration under flow conditions on immobilized rmICAM-1 and rmCXCL1 revealed a significant migration defect in Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells, which was restored in Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells and was comparable to the migration of WT control dHoxb8 cells (Fig. 6I, 6J). Furthermore, Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells displayed a defect in 3D chemotactic migration toward a gradient of rmCXCL1 in rat tail collagen networks (1.5 mg/ml), which was restored in Myh9-RESdHoxb8 cells (Fig. 7A, 7B), underlining the specific importance of Myh9 in neutrophil migration. Both Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells and Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells were able to sense and orient toward the chemotactic gradient as demonstrated by rose plots and the analysis of directness and forward migration index (Fig. 7C, 7D).

## Myh9 localizes at sites of cell membrane retraction

To explore the spatial and temporal dynamics of Myh9 during neutrophil 3D migration in rat tail collagen networks, we analyzed Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells expressing Myh9-EGFP using live cell spinning disk confocal microscopy. Myh9 localized differently during fast, medium, and slow migration (Fig. 8). Fast, medium, and slow migration were defined for each cell individually. Here, the fastest, the medium, and the slowest migration velocity was detected for each individual cell, and the intracellular localization of Myh9 was analyzed at these three time points. Fast migrating Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells showed a mean velocity of 5.5 m m/min and localized Myh9 mainly at the rear of the cell, whereas slow migrating Myh9RES-dHoxb8 cells had a mean velocity of 1.8 m m/min and accumulated Myh9 at the front of the cell (Fig. 8A, 8B).

Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells with a medium velocity migrated 3.3 m m/min and localized Myh9 equally in the front and the back of the cell. In general, neutrophils enriched Myh9 in branching lamellipodia and at the rear of the cells while retracting the uropod (Fig. 8C, Supplemental Video 1). Branching lamellipodia were retracted upon the enrichment of Myh9, and the leading edge was consolidated. Fast migration was performed when Myh9 was mainly located at the rear of the cell suggesting that Myh9 exerts its function specifically at sites of membrane retraction (Fig. 8D).

## Discussion

Studies on the functional impact of Myh9 in neutrophils have been limited to pharmacological inhibitors. In this study, a genetic approach to KD Myh9 in neutrophils was applied using Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice. In addition, a Myh9-KD-Hoxb8SCF cell line expressing rescuing Myh9-EGFP was established. Our data demonstrated the importance of Myh9 for 2D migration, transmigration, and 3D migration in vitro potentially by regulating F-actin dynamics. The laser-induced skin injury model of sterile inflammation in the ear and the CXCL1-induced peritonitis in mice revealed defects in extravasation upon downregulation of Myh9 expression. Using live cell imaging, the versatile subcellular localization of Myh9 and its role in membrane retraction during migration were elucidated.

As previous studies were performed under static conditions in vitro, it remained to be explored if the published results reflect the situation under flow conditions, which mimics the physiological condition in vivo. The number of rolling and adherent neutrophils under flow conditions was not altered by treatment with pn-blebbistatin, indicating that Myh9 was dispensable for the induction of adhesion of neutrophils under flow conditions, which was similar to results observed in T cells (22). During 2D migration under flow conditions, pnblebbistatin-treated neutrophils exhibited a phenotype with multiple pseudopods and an elongated uropod as well as reduced migration speed and Euclidian distance. This data corresponded with results under static conditions (8, 9, 20, 45). Additionally, we observed an increased cell area in pn-blebbistatintreated neutrophils during 2D migration under flow conditions, which was similar to findings of Jacobelli et al. (23) in blebbistatin-treated T cells. Studies on transmigration of blebbistatin-treated HL60 cells or T cells revealed that the cells failed to properly transmigrate through a monolayer of endothelial cells (19, 21). We verified these results with pn-blebbistatintreated freshly isolated murine neutrophils using a reductionist transmigration set-up with an ICAM-1-coated polycarbonate membrane.

To specifically knockout Myh9 in hematopoietic cells, we crossed Vav-iCre + mice with Myh9 fl/fl mice. As described, none of our living offspring had a Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl genotype, leading to the hypothesis that the complete deletion of Myh9 in progenitor cells of the hematopoietic system was lethal. According to previous reports, lack of functional Myh9 in T cells

Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice ( n = 7 Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and n = 9 Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice). ( E G -) Neutrophil extravasation of WT → WT, Het → WT, and Mix → WTbone marrow chimeras was analyzed in CXCL1-induced peritonitis. CD45.1 WT neutrophils. CD45.2 Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils. ( E ) WBCand differential leukocyte counts ( n $ 5 for each for each chimeric model). ( F ) Relative blood neutrophil counts bearing the CD45.1 or CD45.2 allele assessed by flow cytometry using specific fluorescently labeled Abs ( n $ 5 for each for each chimeric model). ( G ) Number of extravasated neutrophils within the peritoneal lavage 4 h after the i.p. injection of 0.9% NaCl or 300 ng rmCXCL1. ( n = 2, 0.9% NaCl injection; n $ 4, CXCL1 injection for each chimeric model). ( A B , , and D F - ) Data represent mean 6 SEM. ( C and G ) Data represent individual data points and mean values (bar). * p , 0.05, ** p , 0.01, *** p , 0.001. Lymph, lymphocytes; Mono, monocytes; PMN, neutrophils.

FIGURE 5. dHoxb8 cells represent a valid model to study neutrophil trafficking. ( A ) Representative microscopic images of Hoxb8-SCF cells before (d0) and after (d4) removal of estrogen for the induction of differentiation in the presence of 2% SCF and 20 ng/ml rmG-CSF, May-Grunwald-Giemsa staining. Scale bar, 10 m m. ( B D -) Differentiation profile of Hoxb8-SCF cells before (d0) and after (d4) removal of estrogen in comparison with freshly isolated murine neutrophils ( n = 3). Expression of ( B ) CD34, Flt3, and c-kit, ( C ) Gr-1, Ly6G, and CXCR2 as well as ( D ) CD11a, CD11b, CD11c, and CD18 was analyzed by flow cytometry using specific fluorescently labeled Abs. Mean fluorescence intensity is shown. ( E ) Upregulation of CD11b and CD18 cell surface expression upon stimulation using 100 ng/ml rmTNFa , 100 ng/ml rmCXCL1, 3 mM Mn 2+ , 100 nM PMA, or 100 nM fMIVIL or untreated ( 2 ) for negative control. Mean fluorescence intensity is shown ( n = 3). ( F ) Induction of adhesion on immobilized rmICAM-1 or murine fibrinogen under static conditions upon stimulation as indicated above. Adherent cells were normalized to untreated cells ( n = 3). ( G ) Rolling and adhesion of dHoxb8 cells and isolated murine neutrophils on immobilized rmICAM-1, rmP-selectin, and rmCXCL1 under flow conditions. Cell counts for rolling and adherent cells over 9 min of shear stress of 1 dyne/cm 2 are displayed ( n = 4). ( H ) Mechanotactic migration of dHoxb8 cells on immobilized rmICAM-1 and rmCXCL1 under flow conditions (1 dyne/cm ) for 10 min using microflow chambers. Single-cell migration tracks and rose plots with indicated mean migration velocity ( 2 n ) and Euclidean distance [ d x y ( , )]. Arrows indicate direction of flow ( n = 206 dHoxb8 cells of three independent experiments). ( ) Chemotactic migration of I dHoxb8 cells on immobilized rmICAM-1 for 10 min in Zigmond chambers with a gradient of rmCXCL1. Triangles indicate orientation of gradients. Single-cell migration tracks and rose plots with indicated mean migration velocity ( n ) and Euclidean distance [ d x y ( , )]. ( n = 479 dHoxb8 cells of three independent experiments). Data represent mean 6 SEM. * p , 0.05.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 6. Myh9-EGFP expression in Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF fetal liver cells rescues their migratory functions in 2D. ( A ) Genotyping of Vav-iCre and floxed Myh9 loci for Myh9 fl , Myh9 wt , and Vav-iCre + . Images are representative of three independent experiments. ( B ) Representative Western blot (left panel) and quantitative analysis (right panel) of Myh9 expression in cell lysates from fetal liver Hoxb8-SCF day 0 and day 4 cells derived from Vav-iCre 2 / Myh9 fl/fl , Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl , and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl mice. Protein expression of Myh9 was normalized to the amount of Gapdh protein expression (control Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 fl/fl dHoxb8 cells 100%) ( n $ 3). ( C ) Flow cytometry histograms (left panel) and quantitative analysis (right panel) of the intracellular Myh9 expression in dHoxb8 cells derived from Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 fl/fl , Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl , and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl mice analyzed by flow cytometry using specific Abs. Isotype controls, dotted lines ( n = 3 for each cell line). ( D ) PCR analysis of the genetic deletion of floxed Myh9 allele in gDNA samples from fetal liver Hoxb8-SCF day 0 and day 4 cells derived from Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 fl/fl , Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl , and (Figure legend continues)

<!-- image -->

resulted in multinucleation and increased cell death in vivo (21, 22). The genetic absence of Myh9 in CD34 + progenitor cells in the bone marrow resulted in a stop of cell division and progressive apoptosis (14). In the Vav-iCre + mouse model used in this study, Cre-recombinase is active as early as day E11.5, leading to the depletion of Myh9 in all hematopoietic progenitor cells (26, 46, 47). Based on this knowledge, we conclude that Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl feti probably died because of the lack of blood cells, as viable bone marrow progenitor cells were missing. However, heterozygous Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl animals were viable and displayed normal WBC counts and maturity of bone marrow and blood neutrophils (Figs. 2A, 2B, 4D, data not shown). In freshly isolated neutrophils of these animals, we detected an unexpected low expression of Myh9 protein compared with control. With one allele missing, we expected a reduction of Myh9 to 50%, but we detected a reduction of ∼ 75% compared with control mice. These findings were reminiscent of the Myh9 protein expression observed in heterozygous patients suffering from Myh9 disorders. Here, neutrophils from 11 patients from six Myh9 families with different mutations in the Myh9 gene showed a median reduction of Myh9 protein down to 32% (with a range of 18-54%) compared with neutrophils of healthy control volunteers (48). Hence, the observed downregulation of Myh9 in the Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice to 25% was similar to the reduction of Myh9 expression in patients with Myh9 disorders. Similar to the murine system, in which no homozygous Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl mice were born, homozygous patients with Myh9 mutations have not been reported to our knowledge.

In comparison with the assays conducted with pnblebbistatin, freshly isolated neutrophils from Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice revealed similar migration defects. Interestingly, the described prominent phenotype in pn-blebbistatin-treated neutrophils with multiple pseudopods and an elongated uropod in 2D and 3D migration was absent (Fig.1B, 1D) (5). STED nanoscopy revealed a shift of the actomyosin network to the rear of Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils as reported in BDMtreated neutrophils (20). In Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils, Myh9 localized as a spot-like structure at the rear of the neutrophil, potentially preventing the formation of an elongated uropod. However, the remaining Myh9 at the front of the neutrophil seemed to be sufficient to prevent the formation of multiple protrusions, suggesting a dose-dependent effect of Myh9 for migration-related functions. This is in line with our findings that the effect of pn-blebbistatin on neutrophil migration is dose dependent (Fig. 1E). The morphological changes with an elongated uropod were absent in neutrophils treated with 1 m M pn-blebbistatin and emerged dose dependently from 5 m M up to a concentration of 50 m M (data not shown).

Similar findings by Klapproth and colleagues (49) support our hypothesis, as they observed a dose-dependent effect of Kindlin-3 on neutrophil function and a minimal threshold amount of Kindlin-3 for survival.

However, the Myh9-dependent migration defect seemed to be integrin independent as 3D migration, which is known to be integrin independent (5), was defective in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils. Furthermore, adhesion strengthening was unaffected in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils compared with control Vav-iCre 2 / Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils (data not shown), which require integrins in the high affinity conformation (50-52). Therefore, we speculate that the migratory defects in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils could occur integrin independent.

Previous studies were limited to in vitro assays as the pharmacological inhibitors of Myh9 are not applicable in vivo. In this study, we used a genetic approach of Myh9 KD in mice. In two different in vivo models, a laser-induced skin injury model of sterile inflammation in the ear and a CXCL1-induced peritonitis model, using Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice, we demonstrated the consequences of reduced Myh9 expression in neutrophils in vivo. Consistent with the results in our in vitro assays, significantly lower numbers of neutrophils extravasated in response to laser injury in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice compared with Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 wt/fl control mice. Similar results were obtained in our peritonitis model, in which significantly less neutrophils extravasated into the peritoneum in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice compared with control mice, revealing the importance of Myh9 for neutrophil recruitment to sites of inflammation during acute inflammation. Using Het → WT chimeric mice undergoing CXCL1-induced peritonitis, we could confirm the concept that Myh9 downregulation in leukocytes was critical for the observed recruitment defect. Furthermore, the extravasation results of the Mix → WT chimeric mice suggested that the migration defect was cell intrinsic, as the extravasation defect was not rescued in presence of WT neutrophils.

To perform essential rescue experiments, we employed the recently developed Hoxb8-SCF cell system (29, 30). The analysis of phenotype and function of undifferentiated Hoxb8-SCF cells and dHoxb8 cells demonstrated their potential to serve as a useful tool to specifically study neutrophil trafficking. Hoxb8SCF cells were generated from Vav-iCre 2 /Myh9 fl/fl , Vav-iCre + / Myh9 wt/fl , and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl liver progenitor cells of viable embryos at day 13. Interestingly, not only Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl but also surviving Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells displayed residual Myh9 protein expression. Further PCR analyses revealed that the surviving Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells deleted only one Myh9 allele and kept the other Myh9 allele, suggesting that the selection pressure during cell division and differentiation toward neutrophils favors Hoxb8-SCF cells that

Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl mice. Myh9 del , PCR product for deleted exon 1 of Myh9 by active iCre. ( E ) Confocal microscopy of HEK-293T cells transfected with Myh9-EGFP (turquoise) and stained for F-actin (magenta). Scale bar, 10 m m ( n = 2). ( F ) Vector pMSCV-Puro-Myosin-II-A-GFP used for transduction of Hoxb8-SCF cells (left panel) and flow cytometric analysis of successful transduction (right panel). Numbers indicate cells in each panel in percent of total cells analyzed (100%). ( G ) Flow cytometry of fetal liver Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells, before (left panel) and after transduction (middle panel) with pMSCV-Puro-Myosin-II-A-GFP , as well as after FACS (right panel). Numbers indicate cells in each panel in percent of total cells analyzed (100%). ( H ) Representative Western blot indicating the expression of Myh9-EGFP (green) in transduced Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells (Myh9-RES-Hoxb8-SCF cells) before (d0) and after (d4) differentiation. Endogenous Myh9 expression (red) in Myh9-KD-Hoxb8-SCF cells and Myh9-RES-Hoxb8-SCF cells. Overlapping signal of Myh9-EGFP (green) and endogenous Myh9 (red) presented as merge (yellow). ( I and J ) Mechanotactic migration of control dHoxb8 cells (Ctrl), Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells (KD), and Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells (RES), under flow conditions (1 dyne/cm ) using microflow chambers coated with 2 immobilized rmICAM-1 and rmCXCL1 ( n = 395 control dHoxb8 cells, 734 Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells, 233 Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells of at least three independent experiments). ( ) I Single-cell migration tracks after 10 min of flow. Arrows indicate direction of flow. Single-cell migration tracks shown are representative of $ 3 independent experiments. ( ) Mean migration velocity and mean Euclidean distance. Data represent mean J 6 SEM. * p , 0.05, *** p , 0.001, ### p , 0.001 compared with Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells.

FIGURE 7. Defects in 3D migration of Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells (KD) are restored in Myh9-EGFP-expressing Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells (RES). ( A D -) Migration of Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells and Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells toward gradients of 100 ng/ml rmCXCL1 in 3D collagen networks (1.5 mg/ml) for 10 min. Triangles indicate orientation of gradients. ( A ) Single-cell migration tracks. ( B ) Mean migration velocity and mean Euclidean distance. ( C ) Rose

<!-- image -->

maintain one allele of Myh9, putatively due to a less active iCre in these cells. Thus, the knockout of our Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells is incomplete, supporting our conclusion that the complete deletion of Myh9 causes cell death, as a minimal threshold amount of Myh9 is required for cell survival (14). Furthermore, the upregulation of Myh9 during differentiation toward neutrophils, which has been described for the maturation of bone marrow-derived neutrophils (13, 14), was absent in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl and Vav-iCre + /Myh9 fl/fl Hoxb8-SCF cells, and we therefore defined these cells as Myh9-KDHoxb8-SCF cells. Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells showed an impaired migration in 2D and 3D environment comparable to the migration behavior of freshly isolated neutrophils from Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl mice, and the migration defects were rescued upon overexpression of Myh9-EGFP in Myh9-KDdHoxb8 cells. These results strongly reinforce the conclusion that the described migration defects were specifically caused by a diminished Myh9 expression.

Analysis of Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells during 3D migration using live-cell imaging demonstrated that Myh9-EGFP was enriched at the uropod of fast migrating cells and accumulated in branching lamellipodia. As Myh9 was found to be of importance to maintain membrane tension but negligible for the formations of protrusions (5, 18), it seems likely that Myh9 enrichment allows retraction of the membrane at the site of Myh9 accumulation. This concept corresponds to our and previous studies observing elongated tails and multiple pseudopods upon blebbistatin treatment during 2D migration, due to the lack of Myh9 function in these regions (8, 9, 20, 45). For chemotactic 3D migration, we propose a model in which neutrophils employ this mechanism to enable fast migration by retraction of their uropod but also to retract branching lamellipodia in the process of orientation toward chemoattractants and to resume movement in the direction of choice by consolidation of the leading edge (Fig. 8C). This novel concept can also be applied on Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils during 2D migration; they display a decreased migration velocity and Euclidean distance in combination with a displaced actomyosin network to the rear of the cell, possibly due to impaired F-actin dynamics upon downregulation of Myh9 as analyzed by the randomization approach. Thus, we speculate that downregulation of Myh9 in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils disturbed the F-actin dynamics. Hence, the migration velocity and Euclidean distance in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl neutrophils was reduced, whereas the remaining Myh9 protein prevented the morphological failure.

Taken together, we were able to demonstrate the generic importance of Myh9 for neutrophil migration. We found that even a remaining Myh9 expression of less than 30% was not sufficient for proper migration in 2D or 3D environments or transmigration but disturbed F-actin dynamics, elucidating the role of this molecule for neutrophil migration. The extravasation defect was also observed in a laser-induced skin injury model of sterile inflammation in the ear and a peritonitis model in Vav-iCre + /Myh9 wt/fl and bone marrow chimeric mice, indicating the cell intrinsic relevance of Myh9 for neutrophil migration in vivo. Rescuing Myh9 expression allowed Myh9RES-dHoxb8 cells to increase their migration speed and

diagrams. ( D ) Directness and forward migration index. Representative single-cell migration tracks and rose plots ( n = 503 Myh9-KD-dHoxb8 cells, 320 Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells of four independent experiments). Data represent mean 6 SEM. * p , 0.05.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 8. Myh9 enriches at sites of membrane retraction during 3D migration in Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells. ( A ) Myh9 intensity distribution in percent in the back or the front of Myh9-RES-dHoxb8 cells compared with total cell (100%) during fast migration (mean velocity of 5.5 m m/min), medium migration (mean velocity of 3.3 m m/min), or slow migration (mean velocity of 1.8 m m/min) in 3D collagen networks. Total cell area was split equally into back and front. ( B ) Myh9 in pseudocolors (upper panel) in representative fast, medium, and slow migrating cells and intensity profile of Myh9 (lower panel) along the segmented line of one representative cell. Scale bar, 5 m m. ( C ) Representative pseudocolored snapshots demonstrating the subcellular localization of Myh9-EGFP during 3D migration in a collagen network (1.5 mg/ml) toward an rmCXCL1 gradient. Scale bar, 5 m m. ( A C -) ( n = 23 fast migrating, 17 medium migrating, 28 slow migrating cells of three independent experiments). ( D ) Myh9 localizes at sites of cell membrane retraction during 3D migration. Arrows indicate direction of migration. Arrowheads indicate retracting lamellipodium and uropod retraction, respectively. Triangles indicate orientation of gradient. Data represent mean 6 SEM. *** p , 0.001.

<!-- image -->

Euclidean distance to control levels, proving again the fundamental importance of Myh9 for neutrophil migration in innate immunity.

## Acknowledgments

We thank Jennifer Truong and Severin Gylstorff for excellent technical assistance, as well as Dr. Steffen Dietzel (Core Facility Bioimaging, Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universita t Mu nchen) for help with the confocal laser-scanning microscopy and STED nanoscopy.

## Disclosures

The authors have no financial conflicts of interest.

## References

- 1. Ley, K., C. Laudanna, M. I. Cybulsky, and S. Nourshargh. 2007. Getting to the site of inflammation: the leukocyte adhesion cascade updated. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7: 678-689.
- 2. Nourshargh, S., and R. Alon. 2014. Leukocyte migration into inflamed tissues. Immunity 41: 694-707.
- 3. Mo 'csai, A., B. Walzog, and C. A. Lowell. 2015. Intracellular signalling during neutrophil recruitment. Cardiovasc. Res. 107: 373-385.
- 4. Begandt, D., S. Thome, M. Sperandio, and B. Walzog. 2017. How neutrophils resist shear stress at blood vessel walls: molecular mechanisms, subcellular structures, and cell-cell interactions. J. Leukoc. Biol. 102: 699-709.
- 5. La mmermann, T., B. L. Bader, S. J. Monkley, T. Worbs, R. Wedlich-So ldner, K. Hirsch, M. Keller, R. Fo rster, D. R. Critchley, R. Fa ssler, and M. Sixt. 2008. Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin-independent flowing and squeezing. Nature 453: 51-55.
- 6. Renkawitz, J., K. Schumann, M. Weber, T. La mmermann, H. Pflicke, M. Piel, J. Polleux, J. P. Spatz, and M. Sixt. 2009. Adaptive force transmission in amoeboid cell migration. Nat. Cell Biol. 11: 1438-1443.
- 7. Pestonjamasp, K. N., C. Forster, C. Sun, E. M. Gardiner, B. Bohl, O. Weiner, G. M. Bokoch, and M. Glogauer. 2006. Rac1 links leading edge and uropod events through Rho and myosin activation during chemotaxis. Blood 108: 2814-2820.
- 8. Xu, J., F. Wang, A. Van Keymeulen, P. Herzmark, A. Straight, K. Kelly, Y. Takuwa, N. Sugimoto, T. Mitchison, and H. R. Bourne. 2003. Divergent signals and cytoskeletal assemblies regulate self-organizing polarity in neutrophils. Cell 114: 201-214.
- 9. Liu, X., T. Yang, K. Suzuki, S. Tsukita, M. Ishii, S. Zhou, G. Wang, L. Cao, F. Qian, S. Taylor, et al. 2015. Moesin and myosin phosphatase confine neutrophil orientation in a chemotactic gradient. J. Exp. Med. 212: 267-280.
- 10. Golomb, E., X. Ma, S. S. Jana, Y. A. Preston, S. Kawamoto, N. G. Shoham, E. Goldin, M. A. Conti, J. R. Sellers, and R. S. Adelstein. 2004. Identification and characterization of nonmuscle myosin II-C, a new member of the myosin II family. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 2800-2808.
- 11. Vicente-Manzanares, M., X. Ma, R. S. Adelstein, and A. R. Horwitz. 2009. Nonmuscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10: 778-790.
- 12. Maupin, P., C. L. Phillips, R. S. Adelstein, and T. D. Pollard. 1994. Differential localization of myosin-II isozymes in human cultured cells and blood cells. J. Cell Sci. 107: 3077-3090.
- 13. Marigo, V., A. Nigro, A. Pecci, D. Montanaro, M. Di Stazio, C. L. Balduini, and A. Savoia. 2004. Correlation between the clinical phenotype of MYH9-related disease and tissue distribution of class II nonmuscle myosin heavy chains. Genomics 83: 1125-1133.
- 14. Shin, J. W., A. Buxboim, K. R. Spinler, J. Swift, D. A. Christian, C. A. Hunter, C. Le 'on, C. Gachet, P. C. Dingal, I. L. Ivanovska, et al. 2014. Contractile forces sustain and polarize hematopoiesis from stem and progenitor cells. Cell Stem Cell 14: 81-93.
- 15. Ke 'piro, ' M., B. H. Va 'rkuti, L. Ve 'gner, G. Vo ros, G. Hegyi, M. Varga, and A. Ma 'lnasi-Csizmadia. ' 2014. para-Nitroblebbistatin, the non-cytotoxic and photostable myosin II inhibitor. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 53: 8211-8215.
- 16. Kolega, J. 2004. Phototoxicity and photoinactivation of blebbistatin in UV and visible light. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 320: 1020-1025.
- 17. Ostap, E. M. 2002. 2,3-Butanedione monoxime (BDM) as a myosin inhibitor. J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil. 23: 305-308.
- 18. Houk, A. R., A. Jilkine, C. O. Mejean, R. Boltyanskiy, E. R. Dufresne, S. B. Angenent, S. J. Altschuler, L. F. Wu, and O. D. Weiner. 2012. Membrane tension maintains cell polarity by confining signals to the leading edge during neutrophil migration. Cell 148: 175-188.
- 19. Stroka, K. M., H. N. Hayenga, and H. Aranda-Espinoza. 2013. Human neutrophil cytoskeletal dynamics and contractility actively contribute to transendothelial migration. PLoS One 8: e61377.
- 20. Eddy, R. J., L. M. Pierini, F. Matsumura, and F. R. Maxfield. 2000. Ca2 +-dependent myosin II activation is required for uropod retraction during neutrophil migration. J. Cell Sci. 113: 1287-1298.
- 21. Jacobelli, J., M. Estin Matthews, S. Chen, and M. F. Krummel. 2013. Activated T cell trans-endothelial migration relies on myosin-IIA contractility for squeezing the cell nucleus through endothelial cell barriers. PLoS One 8: e75151.
- 22. Jacobelli, J., R. S. Friedman, M. A. Conti, A. M. Lennon-Dumenil, M. Piel, C. M. Sorensen, R. S. Adelstein, and M. F. Krummel. 2010. Confinementoptimized three-dimensional T cell amoeboid motility is modulated via myosin IIA-regulated adhesions. Nat. Immunol. 11: 953-961.
- 23. Jacobelli, J., F. C. Bennett, P. Pandurangi, A. J. Tooley, and M. F. Krummel. 2009. Myosin-IIA and ICAM-1 regulate the interchange between two distinct modes of T cell migration. J. Immunol. 182: 2041-2050.

- 24. Chabaud, M., M. L. Heuze ', M. Bretou, P. Vargas, P. Maiuri, P. Solanes, M. Maurin, E. Terriac, M. Le Berre, D. Lankar, et al. 2015. Cell migration and antigen capture are antagonistic processes coupled by myosin II in dendritic cells. [Published erratum appears in 2015 Nat. Commun. 6: 8122.] Nat. Commun. 6: 7526.
- 25. Le 'on, C., A. Eckly, B. Hechler, B. Aleil, M. Freund, C. Ravanat, M. Jourdain, C. Nonne, J. Weber, R. Tiedt, et al. 2007. Megakaryocyte-restricted MYH9 inactivation dramatically affects hemostasis while preserving platelet aggregation and secretion. Blood 110: 3183-3191.
- 26. de Boer, J., A. Williams, G. Skavdis, N. Harker, M. Coles, M. Tolaini, T. Norton, K. Williams, K. Roderick, A. J. Potocnik, and D. Kioussis. 2003. Transgenic mice with hematopoietic and lymphoid specific expression of Cre. Eur. J. Immunol. 33: 314-325.
- 27. Schymeinsky, J., A. Sindrilaru, D. Frommhold, M. Sperandio, R. Gerstl, C. Then, A. Mo 'csai, K. Scharffetter-Kochanek, and B. Walzog. 2006. The Vav binding site of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase Syk at Tyr 348 is critical for beta2 integrin (CD11/CD18)-mediated neutrophil migration. Blood 108: 3919-3927.
- 28. Schymeinsky, J., C. Then, A. Sindrilaru, R. Gerstl, Z. Jakus, V. L. Tybulewicz, K. Scharffetter-Kochanek, and B. Walzog. 2007. Syk-mediated translocation of PI3Kdelta to the leading edge controls lamellipodium formation and migration of leukocytes. PLoS One 2: e1132.
- 29. Wang, G. G., K. R. Calvo, M. P. Pasillas, D. B. Sykes, H. Ha cker, and M. P. Kamps. 2006. Quantitative production of macrophages or neutrophils ex vivo using conditional Hoxb8. Nat. Methods 3: 287-293.
- 30. Redecke, V., R. Wu, J. Zhou, D. Finkelstein, V. Chaturvedi, A. A. High, and H. Ha cker. 2013. Hematopoietic progenitor cell lines with myeloid and lymphoid potential. Nat. Methods 10: 795-803.
- 31. Southgate, E. L., R. L. He, J. L. Gao, P. M. Murphy, M. Nanamori, and R. D. Ye. 2008. Identification of formyl peptides from Listeria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus as potent chemoattractants for mouse neutrophils. J. Immunol. 181: 1429-1437.
- 32. Yan, S. R., M. Huang, and G. Berton. 1997. Signaling by adhesion in human neutrophils: activation of the p72syk tyrosine kinase and formation of protein complexes containing p72syk and Src family kinases in neutrophils spreading over fibrinogen. J. Immunol. 158: 1902-1910.
- 33. Shivanandan, A., A. Radenovic, and I. F. Sbalzarini. 2013. MosaicIA: an ImageJ/ Fiji plugin for spatial pattern and interaction analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 14: 349.
- 34. Helmuth, J. A., G. Paul, and I. F. Sbalzarini. 2010. Beyond co-localization: inferring spatial interactions between sub-cellular structures from microscopy images. BMC Bioinformatics 11: 372.
- 35. Salvermoser, M., R. Pick, L. T. Weckbach, A. Zehrer, P. Lo hr, M. Drechsler, M. Sperandio, O. Soehnlein, and B. Walzog. 2018. Myosin 1f is specifically required for neutrophil migration in 3D environments during acute inflammation. Blood 131: 1887-1898.
- 36. Schymeinsky, J., R. Gerstl, I. Mannigel, K. Niedung, D. Frommhold, K. Panthel, J. Heesemann, M. Sixt, T. Quast, W. Kolanus, et al. 2009. A fundamental role of mAbp1 in neutrophils: impact on beta(2) integrin-mediated phagocytosis and adhesion in vivo. Blood 114: 4209-4220.
- 37. Pick, R., D. Begandt, T. J. Stocker, M. Salvermoser, S. Thome, R. T. Bo ttcher, E. Montanez, U. Harrison, I. Forne ', A. G. Khandoga, et al. 2017. Coronin 1A, a novel player in integrin biology, controls neutrophil trafficking in innate immunity. Blood 130: 847-858.
- 38. Zigmond, S. H. 1977. Ability of polymorphonuclear leukocytes to orient in gradients of chemotactic factors. J. Cell Biol. 75: 606-616.
- 39. Hepper, I., J. Schymeinsky, L. T. Weckbach, S. M. Jakob, D. Frommhold, M. Sixt, M. Laschinger, M. Sperandio, and B. Walzog. 2012. The mammalian actin-binding protein 1 is critical for spreading and intraluminal crawling of neutrophils under flow conditions. J. Immunol. 188: 4590-4601.
- 40. Kurz, A. R., M. Pruenster, I. Rohwedder, M. Ramadass, K. Scha fer, U. Harrison, G. Gouveia, C. Nussbaum, R. Immler, J. R. Wiessner, et al. 2016. MST1dependent vesicle trafficking regulates neutrophil transmigration through the vascular basement membrane. J. Clin. Invest. 126: 4125-4139.
- 41. Ng, L. G., A. Hsu, M. A. Mandell, B. Roediger, C. Hoeller, P. Mrass, A. Iparraguirre, L. L. Cavanagh, J. A. Triccas, S. M. Beverley, et al. 2008. Migratory dermal dendritic cells act as rapid sensors of protozoan parasites. PLoS Pathog. 4: e1000222.
- 42. Stark, K., A. Eckart, S. Haidari, A. Tirniceriu, M. Lorenz, M. L. von Bru hl, F. Ga rtner, A. G. Khandoga, K. R. Legate, R. Pless, et al. 2013. Capillary and arteriolar pericytes attract innate leukocytes exiting through venules and 'instruct' them with pattern-recognition and motility programs. Nat. Immunol. 14: 41-51.
- 43. Khandoga, A. G., A. Khandoga, C. A. Reichel, P. Bihari, M. Rehberg, and F. Krombach. 2009. In vivo imaging and quantitative analysis of leukocyte directional migration and polarization in inflamed tissue. PLoS One 4: e4693.
- 44. Conti, M. A., S. Even-Ram, C. Liu, K. M. Yamada, and R. S. Adelstein. 2004. Defects in cell adhesion and the visceral endoderm following ablation of nonmuscle myosin heavy chain II-A in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 41263-41266.
- 45. Shin, M. E., Y. He, D. Li, S. Na, F. Chowdhury, Y. C. Poh, O. Collin, P. Su, P. de Lanerolle, M. A. Schwartz, et al. 2010. Spatiotemporal organization, regulation, and functions of tractions during neutrophil chemotaxis. Blood 116: 3297-3310.
- 46. Mortensen, M., D. J. Ferguson, M. Edelmann, B. Kessler, K. J. Morten, M. Komatsu, and A. K. Simon. 2010. Loss of autophagy in erythroid cells leads to defective removal of mitochondria and severe anemia in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107: 832-837.
- 47. Finney, B. A., E. Schweighoffer, L. Navarro-Nu 'n ˜ez, C. Be 'nezech, ' F. Barone, C. E. Hughes, S. A. Langan, K. L. Lowe, A. Y. Pollitt, D. Mourao-Sa, et al. 2012. CLEC-2 and Syk in the megakaryocytic/platelet lineage are essential for development. Blood 119: 1747-1756.
- 48. Pecci, A., I. Canobbio, A. Balduini, L. Stefanini, B. Cisterna, C. Marseglia, P. Noris, A. Savoia, C. L. Balduini, and M. Torti. 2005. Pathogenetic mechanisms of hematological abnormalities of patients with MYH9 mutations. Hum. Mol. Genet. 14: 3169-3178.
- 49. Klapproth, S., F. A. Moretti, M. Zeiler, R. Ruppert, U. Breithaupt, S. Mueller, R. Haas, M. Mann, M. Sperandio, R. Fa ssler, and M. Moser. 2015. Minimal amounts of kindlin-3 suffice for basal platelet and leukocyte functions in mice. Blood 126: 2592-2600.
- 50. Ding, Z. M., J. E. Babensee, S. I. Simon, H. Lu, J. L. Perrard, D. C. Bullard, X. Y. Dai, S. K. Bromley, M. L. Dustin, M. L. Entman, et al. 1999. Relative contribution of LFA-1 and Mac-1 to neutrophil adhesion and migration. J. Immunol. 163: 5029-5038.
- 51. Lefort, C. T., and K. Ley. 2012. Neutrophil arrest by LFA-1 activation. Front. Immunol. 3: 157.
- 52. Phillipson, M., B. Heit, P. Colarusso, L. Liu, C. M. Ballantyne, and P. Kubes. 2006. Intraluminal crawling of neutrophils to emigration sites: a molecularly distinct process from adhesion in the recruitment cascade. J. Exp. Med. 203: 2569-2575.