<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Journal of Allergy and Hypersensitivity Diseases

j o u r n a l homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jahd

Review

## Allergy and hypersensitivity diseases in space: physiological changes, clinical aspects, and mechanisms with countermeasures

Brigitte Godard *

MEDES - Institute for Space Medicine and Physiology, Toulouse, Paris, France

## A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:

Immunity

Allergy

Spaceflight

Countermeasures

Skin

Lungs

A B S T R A C T

Allergy and hypersensitivity diseases are important topics worldwide. The development of allergies in humans has becomeincreasinglycommonandisexpectedtoincreaseinthenextfuture,theincidenceisexpectedtoreach50%of the worldwide adult population. Space is not left out in this phenomenon. Having allergies requires further care, considering that astronauts spend time far away from home, working with widely diverse materials for science experiments andrepairing stations. A history of atopy is checked during the selection process and can request further investigation to make sure the crew and mission will not be impacted. It is not itself a disqualifying criterion: it has to be balanced with all other parameters. Space is a very extreme environment for the body that increases the risk to develop allergy or hypersensitivity. This article focuses on the specificity of space by reviewing the very challenging andextremeenvironmentofspace:microgravity, radiation, isolation and other specificity of the International Space Station. Space-related clinical diseases, including allergies, and the mechanisms and countermeasures used in space to avoid major clinical events were also reviewed. One of the major consequences of space in the topic of allergy is the change in the immune system. If the immune system is altered, the capacity for recovery is impacted, and more critical infections can be expected in space. Further studies are needed to ensure the safety of next interplanetary travel to space. In this review new countermeasures are mentioned, they seem promising but need further research on human bodies to ensure safe travel to space.

## 1. Introduction

Allergy and hypersensitivity diseases are important topics owing to their frequency and complexity. The development of allergies in humans has become increasingly common. A French study reported, 20% of French adults develop an allergy, and even 20% -30% worldwide. This incidence is expected to reach 50% by 2050 [1]. The most common cause of allergy is inhaled sensitization (pollen and house dust mites).

This phenomenon is considered in space. Having allergies requires further care, considering that astronauts spend time far away from home, working with widely diverse materials for science experiments and repairing stations. A history of atopy has to be clearly evaluated with a specialist before presenting the candidate to the space medical board. It is not yet recognized as a disqualifying criterion, although all parameters must be checked and balanced to be selected as an astronaut [2].

This review focuses on the specificity of space by reviewing the very challenging and extreme environment of space. Space-related clinical diseases, including allergies, and the mechanisms and countermeasures used in space to avoid major clinical events were also reviewed.

## 2. Space as a hostile and extreme environment

TheInternational Space Station (ISS) is at 300 -400kmaltitude.Atthis altitude, the most unusual factors observed are a significantly higher radiation rate than that on Earth, the absence of gravity, life in a confined environment, and changes in circadian rhythms. Many other factors have been identified. For example, for extravehicular trips, extreme conditions of temperature and pressure occur outside the station. Nowadays it is still very challenging to recognize what is the contribution of each of the two main space issues: microgravity and radiations. Many studies have been

E-mail address: godard\_brigitte@orange.fr (B. Godard).

## http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jahd.2024.100007

Received 12 March 2024; Received in revised form 30 April 2024; Accepted 13 May 2024

Available online 29 May 2024

2950-3124/© 2024 The Author. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS on behalf of Société Française d'Allergologie. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

done on the two recognized Earth-based ground model of microgravity (bed rest and dry immersion). From those, all related consequences on bone, muscle, cardiovascular system, and senses are detailed below (Section 2.2. Impact of microgravity ).

## 2.1. Challenges of radiation exposure in space

Exposure to space radiation is one of the main challenges in future long-term space and interplanetary space missions. However, many uncertainties remain regarding its impact on human health, especially the risk of radiation-induced cancer. Space radiation include energetic solar particles (emitted during solar flares and coronal mass ejections), galactic cosmic rays (GCR) composed of electrons and positrons (2%), protons (85%), helium nuclei (12%), and heavier ions referred to as high-energy and high-charge particles (HZE 1%). Despite technical progress, radiobiological effects and their impact on astronauts are not fully understood.

Epidemiological studies on populations exposed to ionizing radiation (primary X-rays or gamma rays) have demonstrated an increase in the incidence of degenerative tissue damage, cataracts [3], and cardiovascular diseases (atherosclerosis). Although the underlying mechanisms remainunclear, they involve oxidative and inflammatory damage, as well as direct deleterious effects on tissues [4]. Onboard astronauts receive an average of 80 mSv for a maximum of 6 months of solar exposure (when there are maximum sunspots and solar magnetic fields to deflect particles). This value increased to 160 mSv during the period of minimum solar activity for a stay of 6 months. Although the type of radiation differs on Earth, 1 mSv of radiation in space is equivalent to the average dose received for three chest X-rays. On Earth, we generally receive an average of 2 mSv of radiation each year [5].

Regarding the impact of radiations alone, it is more difficult to study because we have no means to simulate on the body the effect of ionized radiation. Animal models are used as human surrogates in studies of radiobiology to obtain data that cannot be gained in ethical studies of humans. A major limitation of current animal models is that animals are, in some relevant ways, different from humans in their response to radiation, e.g., at the cellular, organ, and organism levels [6]. The presumed risk of cancer, cardiovascular diseases and cognitive deficits due to space radiation remains one of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) s top limiting factors as we return to the moon and ' push forward toward Mars. The limitations in knowledge of radiogenic risks have been one of the key factors that can limit an astronaut s '

potential flight assignments as well as active spaceflight-career length [4 -6].

## 2.2. Impact of microgravity

All life on Earth has evolved and adapted to a single downward vector of gravity. In the space environment, this vector is mostly removed, resulting in microgravity conditions. Microgravity affects all physiological systems of the human body. Most of the effects studied since the beginning of space flights are related to the heart and musculoskeletal system. The most important effects are a musculoskeletal melting, with osteoporosis greater than that in postmenopausal women at 1% bone loss per month for an astronaut, whereas this loss is approximately 1% of bone per year during menopause [7]. These values can change individually and according to their location, the most affected are the carrier bones.

The effects on the vascular system, as illustrated in Fig. 1, include stiffness of the vascular wall, atrophy of the heart muscle with some degree of heart failure, and orthostatic intolerance to return to Earth [8].

The harm of space, which is equivalent to that of seasickness or simple motion sickness, affects 30% -50% of the astronauts during the first days but does not last long, with recovery in 2 or 3 days (maximum one week). It is characterized by dizziness, nausea, fatigue, and vomiting, although it responds well to drugs. These manifestations are explained by a conflict of sensory afferences, such as motion sickness, and the different stimulations coming from the vision or from our sensors situated in the inner ear (vestibule) allow for the evaluation of the position of the body and head in space, which can trigger the manifestations [10], as described in Fig. 2.

Attheneurological level, the most known effect are the sleep disorders [11], but other consequences could be more important: changes in the ability to write and concentrate.

The visual system is also affected during flight; it is called spaceassociated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS). This is the subject of considerable current research. It is, among other things, the flattening of the eyeball and enlargement of the sheath of the optic nerve. Most of the time, astronauts do not suffer from any symptoms, except for a certain early presbyopia, which is commonly arranged upon their return to Earth. At present, the mechanisms invoked, in some case but not all, are the modification of the fluid distribution with a shift of fluid toward the upper part of the skull and probably on the eyeball [12 -14]. Recent studies indicate that some of the biology that might be responsible for SANS is related to the mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress from systemic responses. Likely, this phenomenon is multifactorial [15].

Fig. 1. Effect of microgravity on the cardiovascular system. From left (A) to right (D), (A) Before-flight earth gravity; (B) At the beginning of the flight; (C) Adaptation after some days in space; (D) Return to gravity after flight. Reproduced with permission from the authors, Custaud et al. [9].

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2. Space motion sickness: sensory conflict involves the vestibular, muscle cutaneous, and joint receptors in the eyes. Reproduced with the permission from the authors, Custaud et al. [9].

<!-- image -->

In the ENT system, after already mentioning space sickness, which has a neurosensory origin, we can also observe effects on the ears with either infectious or barotraumatic ear infections (mainly post-EVA but not only). Hearing will also be affected, but more so in relation to actual environmental conditions than the microgravity itself. Significant amount of noise can be experienced on board the station because of various computer equipment, treadmills on which the astronauts run, water regeneration systems, and air maintenance.

The digestive system is also affected in space; its involvement may not be as visible as muscle and bone involvement, although it is translated into a feeling of fullness at the beginning of flight with a decrease in appetite. Currently, the digestive flora is the subject of many scientific projects. This flora changes mainly because they live in closed environments [16].

The skin is the largest and most important organ in the body, comprising approximately 16% of the human body weight. The human skin has a surface area of 2 m , which extends to approximately 25 m , 2 2 considering the plethora of hair follicles and sweat ducts [17]. The skin is the main interface between an individual and the environment. Therefore, they have essential physiological functions that allow individuals to live safely even under changing external conditions that might pose potential threats. The most important physiological function of the skin is to protect against various forms of noxious stimuli, including physical and chemical trauma, microorganisms, and radiation. We dedicate a full review in a next section on the knowledge that clinical allergies have a major impact on the skin (Section 3.1 Skin diseases ). A schematic representation of healthy skin and effect of the spaceflight environment on the skin is presented in Fig. 3 [18]. Braun et al. studied the impact of microgravity in their "skin B study" on six astronauts [19]. Their main results were:

- /C15 Increase in dermal collagen;
- /C15 Thinning and loss of epidermal elasticity due to microgravity, or increased epidermal thickness after exposure to hazardous substance exposure;
- /C15 Further decrease in skin volume while increasing sport activities;
- /C15 Thinning stratum corneum and impaired barrier function, possibly increasing the risk of skin cancer;
- /C15 Decreased hydration and loss of dermal elasticity;
- /C15 Changes in the skin microbiome;
- /C15 Significant in-flight reduction of proteobacteria, mostly gammaproteobacteria and betaproteobacteria;
- /C15 Changes in pH;
- /C15 With a concomitant increase in Firmicutes, including staphylococcal and streptococcal species.

Finally, changes in skin structure may also facilitate the establishment of skin infections by opportunistic pathogens such as staphylococcal and streptococcal species. However, the study with six astronauts indicated no deterioration effect. The results of the skin B study contradict their first result on one patient in 2008, and they concluded that it might well be attributed to other improvements in food and exercise, which have been proven as well [19].

The pulmonary system is less impacted by microgravity. Indeed, the lack of gravity has no negative impact on the lung. For the purpose of our review, we will use the Slinky model to explain the lung changes. The Slinky spring model is described in articles by Prisk et al. [20,21]. It demonstrates a spring under the effects of gravity, which provides a useful analogy for the mechanical effects of gravitational removal on human lungs. The spring is deformed by its own weight such that the coils at the toparefarther apart and those at the bottom are closer together. The space

Fig. 3. Schematic representation of healthy skin and spaceflight environment on the skin. (A) Simplified representation of normal skin tissue demonstrating the epidermis consisting of several layers of keratinocytes, the dermis with extracellular matrix proteins secreted by fibroblasts, and the hypodermis; (B) Astronauts report sensitive skin depicted by a red epidermal layer, as well as small cutaneous wounds and delayed wound healing. Thinning of the epidermis has been observed in some astronauts as well as loss of dermal matrix proteins with an increase in elastin/collagen ratio, loss of skin elasticity, and reduced melanin content. Thinning of the dermis has been observed in mice; (C) In simulation models which mimic certain aspects of the spaceflight environment on Earth, loss of collagen proteins and delayed wound healing is shown after cortisol exposure. In addition, ionizing radiation affects dermal matrix gene expression, DNA integrity observed in fibroblasts, and leads to an increased expression of cytokines indicating an inflammation-like state of the skin. Epidermal thickness (dashed arrow) as well as cell number in the basal layer (presented in red) indicate linear energytransfer-dependent alterations. Furthermore, simulated microgravity has been demonstrated to affect the gene expression of cytoskeletal components and delayed migration of fibroblasts pointing towards delayed wound healing. This figure was created using BioRender. Reproduced with permission from the authors, Radstake et al. [18].

<!-- image -->

between the coils can be considered a surrogate for regional lung volume, with the more dependent part of the lung having a lower regional lung volumethanthenon-dependent lung volume. Regional ventilation can be considered a change in the separation of the coils as the spring is stretched. As the lower part of the spring is less expanded than the upper part, responding to a stretch would be better; therefore, ventilation of the dependent lung is greater than that of the non-dependent lung. Perfusion can be considered as blood flowing through the spring itself. As the coils are closer together at the bottom of the lung, regional perfusion is greater in the dependent lung than in the non-dependent lung. Under zero-gravity conditions, the coils were uniformly separated, and both ventilation and perfusion were more uniform than those under gravity. However, because the deformation of the spring affects both ventilation and perfusion, the matching between the two is not greatly altered, mimicking the minimal change observed in ventilation -perfusion ratio matching in space flight.

Gravity imposes on the lungs common effects on both ventilation and perfusion (the zone and Slinky models), serving to maintain high gas exchange efficiency in the lung [22]. Clearly, long-duration exposure to micro G per se does not detrimentally affect the mechanical aspects of lung function, at least in terms of vital capacity and respiratory muscle strength, and does not result in an impairment of pulmonary gas exchange, although the metabolic rate may have reduced [23,24].

## 2.3. Other challenges inside the station

## 2.3.1. Isolation confinement

One of the other effects of life aboard the ISS is confinement, which first has a psychological impact. Astronauts, if they can communicate with families through their iPhone when they want outside of the experiments and communicate with ground crews, have no contact outside the team members for 6 months of their mission [25]. The main factors involved in psychological disturbances include crew changes, work overload, social withdrawal, dangerous atmosphere on board with

contaminants, technical deficiency such as anxiety or anger against the ground support, conflict among crew members. The consequences are psychological changes that can significantly affect a mission, such as irritability, depression, and sleep disturbances [26]. Therefore, psychology is a major chapter for such studies in space and is the main topic among the major challenges for very long interplanetary missions with space radiation and osteoporosis.

## 2.3.2. Dark/light: chronobiological and biorhythm changes

Asthestation flies around the world every 90 min, alternating day and night, all hormonal physiology of astronauts may be disturbed.

## 2.3.3. Other changes due to the space station

Among other changes due to the space station itself are the following factors: an increase level of CO2, a large amount of dust and noise. Of course, we should not forget the deleterious extreme conditions that are linked to an extravehicular activity and include low level of temperature and pressure. A huge effort has been made to reduce the high CO2 level because it impacted the crew with headaches and loss of concentration. In 2014,Lawetal.reportedthateachelevationof1 mmHgcausesheadaches twice the normal. Alternatively, with a decrease of &lt; 1% in headaches, a level of CO2 lower than 2 mmHg is necessary [27].

Noise in the ISS, is generated by the Environment Life Support System, a fundamental system to maintain life as on Earth in the ISS. Of course, the quantity of computers on board as well as sport exercisers, such as treadmills, increase the level of noise [28]. Most of the time, the level of noise reaches the conversational level of 60 dB, but can be higher in some parts of the modules of the station, depending on the activity performed andcontributing to hearing loss [29]. The alarms happen more often than wecould expect and commonly in the night. Hopefully, these false alarms wake up the crew but reduce their sleep quality! [11].

Finally, the orbital debris could occasionally damage the station. In the case of orbital debris announcements, when a crew member is on

board, the level of requirement to follow and watch carefully is high. Hence, a level of risk was defined to monitor if the risk increased. The higher level would be that the crew members are requested to go to Soyuz andbepreparedforanevacuationofcoursetheyhavetowearaswelltheir flight suit [30,31].

Thus, to conclude, space environment is hostile to the human body that is not used to live out of Earth. The full body is impacted by the new environment and to allow humans to stay and work in this extreme conditions, medical and science community worked together to minimize the effect of such impact on the body and developed means to prevent these impacts on the human body. This is called the countermeasures and will be reviewed below (Section 5. Countermeasures ).

## 3. Clinical diseases related to space and allergy following 40 years of experiments

Herein, wo focus on two main systems affected by allergies in space: the skin and lungs. The previous section provides an overview of the skin and lung changes seen in space. On board the ISS, owing to microgravity, manyparticles and dust, specifically when a new cargo is connected to the space station, will fly around and might affect the eyes first, followed by the lungs.

## 3.1. Skin diseases

After sleep disturbances and pains, astronauts most often report skin symptoms during long-term missions (Fig. 4). Among the medications used to address the most critical issues, antiallergic pills are widely used (Fig. 5) [32]. Skin issues are probably the most frequent pathology that flight surgeons (FSs) must deal with after pain. The skin is the most important organ owing to its volume. Meanwhile, if a skin issue occurs at the head, promptly solving the issue is crucial for crew members to avoid a potential infection and to demonstrate that a crew member is healthy especially that a crew member has several interview/media activities with politicians, schools, and families.

## 3.1.1. Symptoms

Among all skin symptoms, the most frequent during flight are erythema, burning, pruritus, peeling contact dryness, sensitivity to rosacea, irritation, rash, thinning, bruising, and ecchymosis [33]. Rashes were the most reported event on board the ISS and are of clinical concern

to FSs. The incidence of rashes onboard the ISS was 25-fold higher than the terrestrial incidence. Although the body locations for rash occurrence onboard the ISS varied, their appearance was generally consistent, manifesting as bumps, nodules, small-scale patches, and itchy redness. The presumed diagnoses for such rashes include eczema, contact dermatitis, psoriasis, allergic cholinergic urticaria, and/or simple acne.

## 3.1.2. Factors

In 2009, Ilscus et al. speculated that factors contributing to on-orbit rashes could include constraints of hygiene, infection, atypical herpes virus infection, photo dermatitis, or cutaneous decompression sickness [34]. Hygiene contributing factors may include soap and no-rinse shampoo use with a suboptimal ability to completely rinse the body areas after cleansing. Irritation from operational equipment, such as extravehicular (EVA -spacewalk) suits, electrocardiogram (ECG) electrodes, or oxygen masks, could be another contributing factor; however, the timing and location of the rash events suggest that they were not related to EVA activity.

In addition, the environment onboard the ISS may be conductive to rashes, consisting of low humidity, prolonged contact with moisture from sweat or wet clothing, and a constrained airflow. Moreover, considering that the majority of notable in-flight events that occurred in the first month of spaceflight, early space adaptation influenced these incidence numbers. However, the authors speculated that persistent dysregulation of the immune system, including data indicating a Th2 shift, may be a significant contributing factor to the incidence of on-orbit rashes. Recent research has confirmed persistent immunological dysregulation during space flight [35]. Rashes and hypersensitivity would suggest immune dysregulation [36].

## 3.1.3. Skin pathology

Dermatological conditions have been frequently reported in previous studies. It accounts for approximately one-third of all the pathologies. Obtaining precise data is difficult because of confidentiality. However, after checking all studies, rough skin issues may represent between 30% and 50% of all clinical events reported.

In fact, during the shuttle flight from STS-1 through STS 89 from April 1981toJanuary1998, a total of 292 dermatological events were reported among a total of 1867 medical events. Furthermore, among the 1867 events, 788 events were directly linked to space motion sickness

Figurc 1. Total numher of medication uses shown by indication: All 24 crewmemhers and all 20 missions have been grouped together to summary oveniew of medication use on longduration ISS missions: Medication use was reported for acute conditions requiring treatment for 7 d or less (A) and for prolonged or conditions requiring treatment longer than 7 d ( B). Note that the y axis in (B) is on a different scale. provide recurring

<!-- image -->

TABLE 2 Medications and uses per cretmemher used

| Medicalion                  |       |       |       |
|-----------------------------|-------|-------|-------|
| NSAID)                      | 4.92  |       | 0.123 |
|                             | 0.324 |       | 0.205 |
| aids SleeP                  |       | 1.767 |       |
|                             | 2.432 |       | 0.016 |
|                             |       | 0.0   | 0.20  |
| SAS treatments              |       | 0.840 |       |
| Castrointestina] treatments | 0.162 | 0.064 | 0.066 |
| Ophthalmic treatments       | 0.162 | 0.0   | 0.0   |
| Anti-infectives             | 0.054 |       |       |

dal Space

Fig. 5. Medications used by astronauts during long-term missions to address the most critical issues. Reproduced with the permission from the author V.E. Wotring [32].

symptoms. Also, if we exclude it these would give a total of 27% dermatological clinical cases [37].

On Mir in between March 1995 and June 1998, astronauts of all nationalities, 53 dermatological events of 149 events were recorded. Not all may have been reported, and 35% of the total events were reported during this period [38].

In the ISS program through Expedition 37/38 involving 46 crew members, 37 events were reported among 70, which is half of the events. Meanwhile, the herpes virus should be probably extracted, thus leaving 44% of the total events [39].

In a study conducted by Dunn et al. in 2018, the most frequent skin pathologies reported in space were extracted and reported thereafter [40].

3.1.3.1. Atopic dermatitis. Atopic dermatitis (AD) is one of the most prevalent diseases worldwide and is associated with a significant burden onhealthcare resources and patients [41]. The environment in space, low humidity combined with extreme cold, puts astronauts with pre-existing AD at an increased risk of acute flares during space flight. Additionally, immunological dysregulation as described lately can influence the host response to chronic pruritic inflammatory diseases. AD is considered a chronic relapsing inflammatory skin condition. The standard treatment options for AD include minimization of exacerbating factors, ample moisturization, topical or systemic corticosteroids, and antihistamines, some of which may not be conducive to space flights.

3.1.3.2. Contact dermatitis. Contact dermatitis (CD) is a common inflammatory skin disease affecting approximately 15% of the adult general population over their lifetime. This is caused by exposure to contact allergens and irritants. Pruritus is a hallmark of CD.

Traditionally, CD has been defined as a T-cell-mediated disease divided into sensitization and elicitation phases. Studies using mouse models to analyse the immune response to contact allergens have revealed that both CD41 and CD81T cells play central roles in the response following sensitization to a strong experimental allergen. In addition to T cells, cells of the innate immune system, including innate lymphoid cells, mast cells, neutrophils, and dendritic cells (DC), play critical roles in sensitization and elicitation. Recent studies have elucidated the crucial role of mast cells in initiating the vascular response to contact allergens. Mast cells mediate neutrophil influx into the skin via the directional secretion of tumour necrosis factor (TNF) into blood vessels. Neutrophils play an important role in both sensitization

and elicitation and are required for the activation of DC during sensitization [42].

CD is commonly reported in space. For instance, according to NASA historical records, irritants causing CD include micropore tape, fiberglass, beta cloth, ECG chest wall electrode patches, and the deer skin lining of a communication carrier [43]. Other studies have reported flight gloves, facemasks, and headphones as inciting agents for aircraft pilots. CD has severe consequences [44].

3.1.3.3. Dry skin. Although dry skin is not a disease, changes in the microbiome can lead to its pathology. Imbalances in skin microbiota composition (dysbiosis) are associated with several skin conditions, including pathological conditions such as eczema, acne, allergies, or dandruff, and non-pathological conditions such as sensitive skin, irritating skin, or dry skin. Dry skin makes the skin appear rough, itchy, flaky, or scaly.

Dry skin is a common dermatological condition among astronauts [45]. The risk factors among astronauts include advanced age, dry climate (such as that experienced in space, onboard the ISS), and preexisting skin conditions. A study comparing photographs of the skin before and after a spaceflight demonstrated aging-like skin changes, coarsening of the skin surface, and epidermal thinning. These findings are likely related to the decreased epidermal cell turnover and elucidate the mechanism of xerosis in astronauts during space flights. As previously mentioned, these changes in epidermal thickness are reversible after returning to Earth. The treatment for this condition is moisturization. Surprisingly, some astronauts who used to have dry skin and used a lot of moistureonthegroundmentionedthattheirconditionimprovedonboard the space station, with less need for cream. This could confirm either the fact we use to ' clean too much on Earth ' or using too much antiseptic cream (personal report).

## 3.2. Pulmonary disorders

Themostsevere pulmonary problem during space flight is exposure to exotic atmospheric contaminants and inhalation of foreign bodies. Hydrazine, ammonia, ethylene glycol fumes, and pyrolysis products can cause disorders ranging from minor irritation of the upper airway to disruption of the pulmonary capillary/alveolar integrity, resulting in adult respiratory distress syndrome.

## 3.2.1. Symptoms

Upper respiratory symptoms including congestion, rhinitis, and/or sneezing (20 events) appeared in the second line of symptoms reported during space after skin reports [46] (Fig. 4).

Since neither roentgen, sonographic, nor bronchoscopic imaging capabilities will exist onboard spacecraft in the near future, accurate assessment by a crew medical officer (CMO) will be essential. The relatively noisy environment of a spacecraft makes auscultation, the traditional chest physical examination technique, difficult. Moreover, auscultation is not sufficiently accurate for confirming the presence or absence of pneumonia. Thus, a high degree of suspicion must be maintained when a crew member has a productive cough and fever. Crew membersarealways at an increased risk of inhaling foreign bodies during space flight, particularly during activities that increase minute ventilation (e.g., exercise). The sudden onset of cough, accompanied by a local monotonic wheeze on auscultation, suggested foreign body aspiration. The CMO must assess all anatomic lung segments during the physical examination because the classic gravity- dependent segments may not be at an increased risk of microgravity. An affected crew member should be followed up closely for the development of atelectasis or pneumonia in the lung segments distal to the occlusion [47].

## 3.2.2. Lung diseases

Among all pulmonary disorders, three major types can occur (we exclude here decompression sickness and cardiopulmonary acute disease): infections, allergies, and toxic exposure. Although pulmonary infections do not seem to occur at a higher rate during space flights than on Earth in standard medical practice, infections are a risk if breaches in infection defence occur secondary to pulmonary injury. Inhalation of toxic substances and aspiration of foreign bodies are two of the most likely examples of such injuries. Toxic contamination of the spacecraft atmosphere can also lead to a significant pulmonary injury.

3.2.2.1. Pulmonary infections. Microbial contamination onboard the ISS is a well-known risk. This is the most frequent risk of pneumonia followed by inhalation of toxic substances and finally followed by chemical irritant.

Quantification of airborne bacteria and fungi indicated that the levels of bacteria increased moderately, and the levels of fungi decreased with the duration of missions. Levels of bacteria ranged from a few hundred to 1,000colony-formingunitspercubicmeter(CFU/m 3 ) of air during longer missions [48]. Fifteen bacterial species were recovered from samples collected during space missions. Staphylococcus , Micrococcus , Enterobacter , and Bacillus species were detected in 85% of the missions and Staphylococcus aureus was recovered in 57% of the missions [49]. Fungi tended to be present at a few hundred CFU/m 3 early in the missions, although their quantities dropped to undetectable levels toward the end of the missions. Nevertheless, low levels of Aspergillus and Penicillium species were observed in more than 60% of missions [50]. Among all these microbes, some could affect humans. Moreover, crew members have a spaceflight-related decreased immune system, although this will not be detailed here because it is beyond the scope of this review.

3.2.2.2. Pneumonia by aspiration of foreign bodies. Pneumonia by aspiration of foreign bodies is diagnosed in the clinic as sudden onset of cough accompanied by a local monotonic wheeze on auscultation. This may occur more frequently when a new cargo arrives at the ISS. When they open the hatch, foreign bodies can come and hurt the body. Meanwhile, an allergic reaction should be diagnosed immediately. Conversely, some victims develop moderate obstructive pulmonary dysfunction, presenting as reactive airway disease 2 -6 months after the exposure. Thus, preventing injury is the first step.

Crew members wear an oxygen mask that covers the eyes and mucous membranes of the nose and mouth. Skin protection should be maintained using gloves and chemically resistant suits. Any contaminated clothing

should be disposed in a wet-trash containment system. Such contamination can occur during EVA (diagnosis made based on a combination of the onset of irritation, cough, and coryza). The treatment consists in removal from the source and use of beta-adrenergic aerosols; repeat examinations and pulse oximetry for at least 24 h [38].

3.2.2.3. Inhalation of toxic substances. Inhalation of toxic substances is one of the major causes of allergic reactions in the lungs.

It was first observed in July 1975 at the end of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 3 CM, which involved exposure to 250 ppm nitrogen tetroxide (an oxidizer) for 60min [51]. Nitrogen tetroxide is a gas that is highly irritating to upper airway passages in sufficient amount. Within 3 -30h, the onset of pulmonary oedema and adult respiratory distress syndrome can be expected. Bronchiolitis obliterans can affect 50% of survivors. Less severe exposure may produce only cough and coryza. The initial symptoms included eye burning with tearing, burning, and itching of the skin, chest tightness with retrosternal burning, and non-productive cough upon deep inhalation. They recovered fully and had no other clinical symptoms, and pulmonary oedema was present on radiography a day later [46].

Exposure to toxic chemicals environmental hazards originates from several sources [52]. Propulsion propellants (freon, hydrazines, and nitrogen dioxide) leak into the spacecraft interior and are toxic in small quantities [47]. Hydrazine gas, a propellant used in both space shuttles and the ISS, is extremely irritating to the upper airway passages, skin, and eyes. Similar damage to the lower pulmonary tree can occur following significant exposure [38]. The spacecraft crew can be further exposed if propulsion chemicals enter the spacecraft through an airlock or crystallize on the EVA suits.

Accidental chemical release during space shuttle flights has also been reported. The dominant source may be heat degradation in electronic devices. Thermodegradation of spacecraft polymers with the production of formaldehyde and ammonia is an environmental hazard [38]. Ammonia irritates the upper airway passages. However, crew members can adapt to exposures of limited severity. Ammonia gas exposure for a few seconds causes inflammation of the conjunctiva and pharynx, pharyngeal and retrosternal pain with cough and dyspnoea, although no abnormalities can be observed on radiography. Hypoxemia from chemical burns to the tracheobronchial tree may be delayed by 1 -2 days. The presence of rales and wheezing can predict the onset of adult respiratory distress syndrome and its progression to worsening hypoxemia, which can take weeks or longer to resolve. However, if crew members are well-trained, they should go to the safe part of the station [53]. Quick removal of the affected crew member from the source can limit pulmonary injury, with symptomatic improvement in a week and complete recovery in 1 -2 months. Conversely, some victims develop moderate obstructive pulmonary dysfunction, presenting as reactive airway disease 2 -6 months after the exposure. Based on previous studies, hypoxemia was not observed under normal microgravity conditions. Therefore, any hypoxemia could be attributed to the ammonia and would mandate consideration of returning to Earth and provision of 100% oxygen. Increasing the level of ventilatory support up to intubation and mechanical ventilation can be accomplished on the ISS.

Nine incidents occurred from STS-35 to STS-55, with four resulting from burning electrical wiring. Subsequent analyses revealed benzene, acetaldehyde, dimethyl sulfides, and other compounds in the space shuttle crew compartment atmosphere [49,50]. The experience of the Mir provides a glimpse into the potential risks of contamination from systems designed to protect the health of the crew. Evaluation of the volatile organic compounds in the cabin atmosphere indicated that the levels were below the maximum allowable concentration limits in the spacecraft. Most pollutants reached a state of equilibrium within the first 3 4 days of a mission; however, the exceptions were hydrogen, -methane, dichloromethane, and formaldehyde. Dichloromethane and formaldehyde are of concern because of their significant toxicity.

Methods for the continuous surveillance of toxic contaminants should be conducted using Earth analog models [54]. Healthcare opportunities should be provided. An easily accessible hazardous material manual for space travel should be developed to aid in surveillance, detection, decontamination, and treatment of chemical exposure. The concentrations of the particulate pollutants detected in the space shuttle ranged from35to56mg/m 3 ,withthemajorityofthembeinglargerthan100 m m in diameter. Most of the particles did not settle out of the atmosphere duringthemission.Mostwereorganicinnatureandmostlikelygenerated by crew members [50].

## 4. Mechanism of allergy in space

## 4.1. Change of the immune system in space

The function, morphology, and differentiation of immune cells are impaired in the absence of gravity. Studies dating back nearly 50 years revealed that up to 50% of astronauts returning from space since the Apollo missions have a compromised immune system and are prone to bacterial and viral infections shortly after returning to Earth [55]. Microgravity affects both innate and adaptive immune system [36,37].

## 4.1.1. Changes in the innate human system

4.1.1.1. Neutrophils. Several studies on neutrophils have focused on the number of neutrophils present in the blood, with a reported increase in circulating neutrophils in humans returning from spaceflight [56]. In line with this, a more recent study using 30 parabolas of parabolic flights with 20s of microgravity revealed that neutrophil levels in human blood slightly increased, whereas all other immune cell subsets, such as T and B cells, decreased [57]. Similarly, an increase in neutrophils and neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) has been reported in humans during a 180-day spaceflight as well as in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells cultured for 20 h on a rotating wall vessel (RWV) at 20 revolutions per minute (rpm), indicating that NLR could be used as a potential biomarker to monitor flight health [58].

4.1.1.2. Natural killer cells. A decrease in natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity was observed after 48h under simulated microgravity conditions at 30rpm by RWV, which was related to a decrease in associated cytokine production and surface receptor expression [59]. In 2013, Li et al. investigated the function of NK cells isolated from astronaut peripheral blood that underwent a6-month mission onthe ISS. The results revealed impaired NK cell function in terms of cytotoxic activity against leukaemia K562 cells, which was more prominent in astronauts who underwent their first flight than in experienced astronauts, possibly indicating possible epigenetic adaptation [59].

4.1.1.3. Monocytes. The total monocyte percentage remained unchanged after a 13 -16daysspaceflight[60].However,theexpressionofCD62Land human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR was reduced, indicating impaired monocyte adhesion to the vasculature, tissue migration, and antigen presentation. CD62 L, also known as L-selectin, is a cell adhesion molecule that plays an important role in lymphocyte -endothelial cell interactions. CD62L is expressed in neutrophils, monocytes, Tand B-lymphocyte subsets, and NK cells. CD62 L plays a role in regulating the recruitment of monocytesfromthebloodtotissuesduringinflammation[61,62].HLA-DR plays a vital role in immune responseby regulating theinteraction between antigen-presenting cells, including monocytes. It has been described as a marker of the monocyte -macrophage system. Monocytes express HLA-DR molecules that are responsible for presenting antigens to T cells, thereby presenting antigens to adaptive immune cells [63].

4.1.1.4. Macrophages. Overall, decreased function of macrophages under microgravity conditions was observed [64]. Similarly, under real

spaceflight conditions of microgravity, the utilization of J-111 cells revealed decreased cell motility and reduced F-actin fluorescence intensity (J-111 are major macrophage cell sources used in microgravity experiments). The cytoskeleton and surface proteins are critical for macrophage morphology, motility toward pathogens, and function, and these data indicate that spaceflight and microgravity impair host immune defense [65]. Human primary M1 macrophages (a subtype of proinflammatory macrophages) under real microgravity conditions of suborbital ballistic rockets demonstrated significant reduction in cell volume, nuclear volume, and actin cytoskeleton early at 4s in microgravity compared to the 11 days observed in an earlier experiment [66]. This demonstrates that macrophages rapidly respond to microgravity conditions and that cytoskeletal rearrangement or dysregulation is one of the primary effects of microgravity [67].

In conclusion, these data indicate that microgravity affects macrophage function at the molecular level by disrupting various signalling pathways. Microgravity plays an important role in how macrophages respond to infections as seen by the studies above. Real and simulated microgravity studies have demonstrated that it affects multiple pathways and processes within cells, impairing their ability to provide an adequate immune response. Several studies have indicated that spaceflight can impair the development of DC and greatly suppress the ability of humans exposed to microgravity to launch an immune response [68,69].

4.1.2. Change in the adaptive immune system

Different microgravity platforms yield conflicting results.

4.1.2.1. T-cells. T-cells isolated from mouse spleens that underwent differential exposure to rotary bioreactor-simulated microgravity at 10 rpm revealed different responses to conA stimulation [70]. Decreased proliferation of CD4+ T-cells results in fewer functional subsets and cytokine production, and weakens the immune response against infections. CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells play different roles in the immune system. These data provide further insights into the functional differences created by microgravity exposure in different cell subtypes. Gene expression studies are important for understanding the networks and correlations between genes that are affected by environmental changes. Oneofthe first studies to demonstrate that miRNA expression was altered during spaceflight on the ISS indicated that the expression of microRNA21(miR-21), which is involved in cell cycle progression and proliferation, was suppressed in conA and anti-CD28 stimulated primary human T-cells [69].

4.1.2.2. B-cells. Ashort real spaceflight study and a 6-months spaceflight study have reported no change in the overall B cell subset numbers or proportions, or in the levels of plasma immunoglobulins (Igs) [71,72]. By contrast, Tascher et al. in 2019 have reported a significant reduction in B cells in the spleens of mice 1 week after landing from a 1-month flight in space [70]. These differences may be related to species differences. The immune alteration in human in spaceflight can be summarized as follows:

- /C15 Altered distribution of peripheral leukocytes;
- /C15 Skewed cytokine profiles in many astronauts;
- /C15 Diminished function of specific leukocyte subpopulations;
- /C15 Plasma cytokine alterations with viral shedding in specific crewmembers;
- /C15 Th2 shift-associated with flight;
- /C15 Reactivation of latent viruses, such as herpes virus, could be a biomarker of adaptive immune function, particularly T-cell function [73];
- /C15 Need to develop effective countermeasures for long flights (vaccinations?);
- /C15 Sports, nutrition, antioxidants are the potential countermeasures observed to date.

## 4.2. Other factors involved

## 4.2.1. Acute and chronic stress

Although acute stress can be favourable, long-term or chronic stress can lead to high levels of stress hormones. This will negatively affect immune system regulation and will or might impact each individual component. All changes were observed in both the form (phenotype) and function (killing capacity), resulting in a reduction in cell-mediated immunity and facilitation of the reactivation of latent viruses.

## 4.2.2. Environmental and social factors

Environmental factors and social factors have been described in a previous section (Section 2.3. Other challenges inside the station ). As previously described, social factors include sleep deprivation, altered biological rhythms, and isolation.

## 4.2.3. The microbiome

A longitudinal study conducted by Voorhies et al. in 2019 with nine astronauts (who spent 6 12 months aboard the ISS) -who had been monitored for their microbiome (saliva, smears of the forehead and forearm skin, nose, tongue, and stool) with blood samples to analyse cytokine levels. Pre-, during, and post-flight samples were compared between the 6-month and 1-year missions. The results indicated that the microbiome composition became more similar between astronauts over the course of the mission, mostly because of a decrease in the abundance of a few bacterial taxa [74]. In line with previousexperiments in other spaceflights, a specific increase in the Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio was detected during the 1-year flight period onboard the ISS. Interestingly, this transient change did not persist upon the return to Earth, indicating a rebound across the microbial ecosystem of the gastrointestinal tract [75].

Food intake is closely related to the microbiome composition and functionality. Research has demonstrated that changes in diet are followed by a rearrangement of the gut flora, which can occur within 24 h of initiation and have secondary effects on host immunologic and metabolic markers.

## 5. Countermeasures

Countermeasures are defined as solutions to prevent the undesirable physiologic outcomes associated with spaceflight. These countermeasures have been first tested in multiple studies using Earth-based analogs andifefficient, they have been implemented in space. The most important contribution of these countermeasures are the physical exercise and adequate food. Of course, as explained earlier, each system is impacted by space environment and all scientists in their domain can provide countermeasure but, identifying one countermeasure acting on all systems would be very ideal!

## 5.1. Two generic countermeasures

## 5.1.1. Exercise

Sports are the best-known countermeasures [76 -80]. To avoid losing too much bone and muscle, it has been established since the beginning of space flight era that astronauts have to practice 2 h of daily sport activity. This activity will be adapted to the phase of the mission, and because of the lack of gravity, a treadmill must be performed with a harness to reproduce tension on the body. Thus, from the beginning until the end of the mission, the goal of the trainer will be to regularly increase the power so that the astronaut after 6 months in-flight has not lost too much power. Three types of sports will be performed on board the station, the cycloergometer and treadmill, which both will increase or better stabilize the aerobic activity and the new advance resistive exercise device will train the strength [79,80].

An additional benefit of performing exercise in space is its profound effect on normal immune system functioning. A plethora of evidence in terrestrial settings has demonstrated that regular exercise of moderate intensity can improve or preserve the normal functioning of the immune system [81]. For instance, regular exercise has been demonstrated to reduce chronic low-grade inflammation by reducing the expression of toll-like receptors (especially TLR-4) on the surface of monocytes, promoting the switching of pro-inflammatory M1-type macrophages to the M2 anti-inflammatory type, and mitigating their downstream inflammatory signalling cascades [81]. Regular moderate-intensity exercise has also been reported to improve immune responses to influenza and pneumococcal vaccines, hasten recovery after experimental rhinovirus infection, and reduce self-reported symptoms associated with upper respiratory tract infections [82].

The amount of exercise performed, in terms of intensity and duration, must be finely balanced to exert the desired positive effects on immunity. For instance, frequent heavy and prolonged bouts of endurance exercise have been associated with immune system impairment, latent viral reactivation, and increased infectious episodes, in stark contrast to the effects reported after regular moderate-intensity exercise [83]. The best mode of exercise (i.e., aerobic, strength, or a combination of both) for improving or maintaining immune health is subject to debate, although the effectiveness of one exercise mode over another is likely to depend on the study population and the environment in which immunity is challenged or impaired [84].

## 5.1.2. Nutrition/food prevention currently on use

All crew members in the NASA/European Space Agency (ESA) team receive vitamin D. For Russian teams, the FS provides multivitamins. Anotherimportantandusefulmethodfornutritionpreventionisreducing sodium content in food and supplying fresh produce and extra preferred foods on the (more frequent) resupply vehicles. As the microbiome is increasingly studied, new preprobiotics can be administered to the crew. This is always discussed in agreement with the nutritionist, crew members, and the FS.

Protein intake during flight typically exceeds dietary recommendations, and all indispensable aminoacids are generally assumed to be provided in sufficient amounts. Supplementation with whey protein, which has high leucine content, has been reported to enhance NK cell function and interleukin (IL)-12 concentration and increase plasma glutathione concentrations in patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [85,86].

Although astronauts receive vitamin D supplementation, an evaluation of the relationship between vitamin D status (and nutritional status in general) and immune system function is required. In addition, the lack of data on therapeutic effects of vitamin D supplementation when levels of 25(OH)D3, the substrate of 25(OH) D3-1a -hydroxylase, are sufficient warrants further studies [87].

Omega-3 fatty acids are long-chain, polyunsaturated fatty acids; a previous study has documented their beneficial effects on the immune and other systems [88]. Omega-3 fatty acids protect against radiationinduced or other oxidative damage [89]. The effects of omega-3 fatty acids on inflammatory cytokines, specifically TNF a , are well documented on the ground [90,91]. However, further study during spaceflight is warranted.

## 5.2. Additional preventive countermeasures with a goal on immunology

## 5.2.1. Quarantine and flight crew health stabilization programme

No specific immune countermeasures were adopted, although since the beginning of the flight, the first immune countermeasure was the quarantine period implemented by the Flight Crew Health Stabilization Programme (HSP). It was implemented during the Apollo program to reduce the incidence of infectious diseases among astronaut flight crews in the immediate pre-flight/in-flight periods [92]. The HSP defines

certain controls to minimize crew exposure to pathogens by providing a quarantine situation for the crew that reduces contact with potential pathogens by limiting the number of individuals who come into immediate contact with the crew. For the ISS, specific vehicle design controls are intended to reduce the risk of infectious diseases. These include the use of HEPA air/water filters and microbiological monitoring before launch, including screening of crew members, food, potable water, vehicle surfaces, vehicle air, and various cargo, as well as a biosafety reviewofthepayloads. Themonitoring ofmicrobialcontamination onthe ISS includes surfaces, air, and water. The preflight medical screenings for ISS crew members include complete blood count/differential, C-reactive protein, murine allergen-specific IgE panel, nasal screen for methicillin resistant S. aureus , as well as a screen to detect and eradicate Helicobacter pylori from crewmembers (serological H. pylori IgG and IgA antibody test results; urea breath test results, if indicated) [2].

## 5.2.2. Vaccination

Countermeasures aimed at minimizing the impact of viral pathogens, such as vaccinations, are being evaluated. There are no vaccines currently available for any of the eight human herpes viruses except for Zostavax, which prevents zoster (shingle diseases in approximately 50% of the patients caused by the varicella zoster virus [VZV]). Studies performed by Crucian et al. in the NASA lab indicated that reactivation of VZV, particularly during longer spaceflights, can potentially lead to clinical diseases, including zoster, chronic neuropathic pain, vision loss, and cognitive impairment. Furthermore, continued viral shedding post spaceflight may cause clinical disease in crew contacts, including uninfected or immunocompromised individuals and newborn infants. Thus, spaceflight countermeasures need to be developed to prevent VZV reactivation and ensure the health of the crew, as well as the health of their contacts upon return. One such countermeasure is the prophylactic administration of an antiviral drug against VZV (i.e., valacyclovir). In addition, the Flight Medicine Clinic at Johnson Space Center, NASA, has initiated the vaccination of all crew members with Zostavax, a vaccine to prevent shingles before spaceflight [93].

## 5.2.3. Behavioural countermeasures

The relationship between the immune system and psychological stress, circadian rhythms, and sleep-key factors that fall within the purviewofbehavioural health management -is well established. Since the Shuttle -Mir missions, space agencies have provided psychological support services to crew members to help minimize stress and promote wellbeing and performance. This support may include individual monitoring of cognitive function and psychological health, facilitating connections with the family, and fatigue management services. For ISS crew members, a private psychological conference between the astronaut and a psychologist or psychiatrist, held once every 2 weeks, provides the opportunity for the crew to discuss issues related to mission stressors (if any). In addition to in-flight monitoring, international space agencies facilitate regular crew communication with their families during missions.

## 5.3. Proposed immune countermeasure strategy for astronauts

Crucian et al. will tested soon a new strategy at a ' ground analog ' for spaceflight immune dysregulation -Antarctica winter over [94]. The results of that study will define precisely the effect of the behavioural changes on the immune system of ' normal ' humans. To accurately evaluate the effect of the countermeasure strategy on the immune system, this team from NASA, expanded their arsenal of immunologic assays to include measures of intracellular cytokine production (IL-2, interferon-g, IL-4, and IL-10), cytotoxic T-cell function (perforin, TNF, and degranulation), Th17 cells, regulatory T-cells, and antigen-presenting cells. This comprehensive assessment of astronauts is unprecedented and will surely detect the sensitive effects of countermeasure strategies [95].

## 6. Conclusion

Aswidelydescribedinthisreview,allergies area topicof main interest in space as they are on the ground. Clinical symptoms and diseases can be easily identified in space. This is more challenging because the immune system is affected by many factors described in this review. Therefore, allergic reactions may be linked to the immune system. To avoid critical diseases in space, we need to clarify how the immune system is dysregulated and howit can be improved. If the immune system is altered, the capacity for recovery is impacted, and more critical infections can be expected in space. From the beginning of the mission, it has always been a challenge for FSs to make sure that crew members, because of their immunechanges,will be able to recover from an infection. Indeed, for the same infection, it is well known that we need to use a higher quantity of antibiotic or an antibiotic with a wider spectrum. Consequently, the international partner of the ISS in the microbiological team emphasized that microgravity has been reported to induce changes in the virulence, antibiotic resistance, and growth of microorganisms. Additionally, the mechanisms underlying the altered virulence and antibiotic resistance remain unclear. Increased bacterial growth has been demonstrated in the microgravity environment of the ISS [96]. This is likely related to the low shear stress and turbulence of microgravity, an environment analogous to the sites of bacterial growth in the human body. Therefore, more studies are needed on the changes in virulence patterns, antibiotic resistance, and growth of microbes onboard the ISS to identify and accurately treat infections during spaceflight to prepare for mission beyond LEO [97].

The first step in the preventive countermeasure to avoid allergy is the selection process, then the training and the two best mandatory countermeasures used on board: exercise and adequate nutrition [79]. The selection criteria nowadays do not include specific allergy test but of course medication used by each astronaut in space will be tested on the ground. To further improve our gap in allergy/immunology in space research, the author would recommend increasing the collaborations in between all scientists and clinician from ground and space. The ISS is a very big lab where there is a wish in between all astronauts and all people around (science teams, medical doctors, engineers and managers) to makesure that no risk is taken and step by step we understand better how the body is regulated and help patients on the ground.

## Conflict of interests

The author declare that she has no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## References

- [1] Seite S, Taïeb C, Pham-Thi N, Barbaud A. Allergy prevalence in France and skin impact - Epidemiological survey of a representative sample of French Adults. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol 2021;14:901 -7, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2147/CCID.S307345.
- [2] Godard B, Weerts G. Selection and follow-up of astronauts. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss 2018;2018:3 10, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amcp.2018.02.002. -
- [3] Maalouf M, Durante M, Foray N. Biological effects of space radiation on human cells: history, advances and outcomes. J Radiat Res 2011;52:126 -46.
- [4] Azizova TV, Bragin EV, Hamada N, Bannikova MV. Risk of cataract incidence in a cohort of mayak pa workers following chronic occupational radiation exposure. PLoS One 2016;11(10):e0164357.
- [5] NASA Facts -Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. Understanding space radiations. FS -2002-10-080-JSCOctober 2002.
- [6] Chancellor J, Nowadly C, Williams J, Aunon-Chancellor S, Chesal M, Looper J, et al. Everything you wanted to know about space radiation but were afraid to ask. J Environ Sci Health C Toxicol Carcinog 2021;39(2):113 -28, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/ 26896583.2021.1897273.
- [7] Smith SM, Heer M, Shackelford LC, Sibonga JD, Spatz J, Pietrzyk RA, et al. Bone metabolism and renal stone risk during International Space Station missions. Bone 2015;81:712 20. -
- [8] Hughson RL, Robertson AD, Arbeille P, Shoemaker JK, Rush JW, Fraser KS, et al. Increased postflight carotid artery stiffness and inflight insulin resistance resulting from 6-mo spaceflight in male and female astronauts. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2016;310(5):H628 -38.

## B. Godard

|           | [9] Custaud MA, Blanc S, Gauquelin-Koch G, Gharib C. L humain dans l espace. ' '                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|-----------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [10]      | Norderstedt, Germany: Edition BoD - Books on Demand; 2020. Clément G. Fundamentals of space medicine. 2nd ed New York, NY: Springer; 2011. Barger LK, Flynn-Evans EE, Kubey A, Walsh L, Ronda JM, Wang W, et al. Prevalence of                                                                              |
| [11]      | sleep deficiency and use of hypnotic drugs in astronauts before, during, and after spaceflight: an observational study. Lancet Neurol 2014;13(9):904 - 12.                                                                                                                                                  |
| [12]      | Mader TH, Gibson CR, Pass AF, Kramer LA, Lee AG, Fogarty J, et al. Optic disc edema, globe flattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts observed in astronauts after                                                                                                                                   |
| [13]      | long-duration space flight. Ophthalmology 2011;118(10):2058 - 69. Lee AG, Mader TH, Gibson CR, Tarver W. Space flight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome. JAMA Ophthalmol 2017;135(9):992 - 4.                                                                                                                |
| [14]      | Patel N, Pass A, Mason S, Gibson CR, Otto C. Optical coherence tomography analysis of the optic nerve head and surrounding structures in long-duration International Space                                                                                                                                  |
| [15]      | Station astronauts. JAMA Ophthalmol 2018;136:193 - 200. da Silveira W, Fazelinia H, Rosenthal SB, Laiakis E, Kim MS, Meydan C, et al.                                                                                                                                                                       |
| [16]      | Multiomics analysis reveals mitochondrial stress as a central hub for spaceflight biological impact. Cell 2020;183:1185 - 201. Koskinen K, Rettberg P, Pukall R, Auerbach A, Wink L, Barczyk S, et al. Microbial                                                                                            |
| [17]      | biodiversity assessment of the European Space Agency s ExoMars 2016 mission. ' Microbiome 2017;5(1):143. Sfriso R, Egert M, Gempeler M, Voegeli M, Campiche R. Revealing the secret life of skin                                                                                                            |
| [18]      | - with the microbiome you never walk alone. Int J Cosmet Sci 2020;42:116 - 26. Radstake WE, Baselet B, Baatout S, Verslegers M. Spaceflight stressors and skin health. Biomedicines 2022;10(2):364.                                                                                                         |
| [19]      | BraunN,BinderS,GroschH,TheekC,ÜlkerJ,TronnierH,etal.Currentdata oneffects of long-term missions on the international space station on skin physiological                                                                                                                                                    |
| [20]      | parameters. Skin Pharmacol Physiol 2018;32:43 - 51. Prisk GK. Pulmonary challenges of prolonged journeys to space: taking your lungs to the moon. Med J Aust 2019;211(6):271 - 6, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.5694/                                                                                            |
| [21]      | mja2.50312. Prisk GK, Fine JM, Cooper TK, West JB. Vital capacity, respiratory muscle strength, and pulmonary gas exchange during long-duration exposure to microgravity. J Appl Physiol 2006;101:439 - 47.                                                                                                 |
| [22]      | West JB, Dollery CT, Naimark A. Distribution of bloodflow in isolated lung: relation to vascular and alveolar pressures. J Appl Physiol 1964;19:713 - 24. Michels DB, West JB. Distribution of pulmonary ventilation and perfusion during short periods of weightlessness. J Appl Physiol 1978;45:987 - 98. |
| [23]      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| [24]      | Guy HJB, Prisk GK, Elliott AR, Deutschman 3rd RA , West JB. Inhomogeneity of pulmonary ventilation during sustained microgravity as determined by single-breath washouts. J Appl Physiol 1994;76:1719 - 29.                                                                                                 |
| [25]      | Tafforin C. Confinement vs. isolation as analogue environments for Mars missions - 5. - 40, doi:http://dx.doi.                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| [26]      | from a human ethology viewpoint. Aerosp Med Hum Perform 2015;86(2):131 Marazziti D, Arone A, Ivaldi T, Kuts K, Loganovsky K. Space missions: psychological and psychopathological issues. CNS Spectr 2022;27(5):536 org/10.1017/S1092852921000535.                                                          |
| [27]      | Law J, Van Baalen M, Foy M, Mason SS, Mendez C, Wear ML, et al. Relationship between carbon dioxide levels and reported headaches on the International Space Station. Occup Environ Med 2014;56(5):477 - 83.                                                                                                |
| [28]      | Nakashima A, Limardo J, Boone A, Danielson RW. Influence of impulse noise on noise dosimetry measurements on the International Space Station. Int J Audiol 2020;59 (suppl 1):S40 - 7.                                                                                                                       |
| [29]      | Buckey Jr JC, Musiek FE, Kline-Schoder R, Clark JC, Hart S, Havelka J. Hearing loss in space. Aviat Space Environ Med 2001;72(12):1121 - 4.                                                                                                                                                                 |
| [30]      | Yang FY, Nelson B, Aziz J, Carlino R, Perez AD, Faber N, et al. LightForce photon- pressure collision avoidance: efficiency analysis in the current debris environment and long-term simulation perspective. Acta Astronaut 2016;126:411 - 23.                                                              |
| [31]      | Evans S, Lewis H, Williamsen J, Evans H, Bohl W. Bounding the risk of crew loss following orbital debris penetration of the International Space Station at assembly stages 1J and 1E. Adv Space Res 2004;34(5):1104 - 8.                                                                                    |
| [32] [33] | Wotring VE. Medication use by U.S. crewmembers on the International Space Station. FASEB J 2015;29(11):4417 - 23, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1096/fj.14-264838. Farkas Á, Farkas G. Effects of spaceflight on human skin. Skin Pharmacol Physiol                                                              |
| [34]      | 2021;34:239 45. - Ilscus LS, Johnston SL, Moynihan S, Kerstman EL, Marshal GD. Rashes and exanthems on long duration space flights. California: Poster presented at: 80th Annual Scientific Meeting of the Aerospace Medical Association; 2009.                                                             |
| [35]      | Crucian B, Kunz H, Sams CF. Evidence report: risk of crew adverse health event due to altered immune response human health countermeasures element. Houston, TX: National Aeronautics and Space Administration; 2015.                                                                                       |
| [36]      | Crucian BE, Zwart SR, Mehta S, Uchakin P, Quiriarte HD, Pierson DL, et al. Plasma cytokine concentrations indicate that in vivo hormonal regulation of immunity is altered during long-duration spaceflight. J Interferon Cytokine Res 2014;34:778 - 86.                                                    |
| [37]      | SamsCF,PiersonDL.Immunologicconcerns.In:BarrattMR,PoolSL,editors.Principle of clinical medicine for space flight. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag; 2008. p. 307 - 15.                                                                                                                                         |
| [38]      | Marshburn TH. Acute care. In: Barratt MR, Pool SL, editors. Principle of clinical - 22. Crucian BE, Babiak-Vazquez A, Johnston S, Pierson DL, Ott CM, Sams C. Incidence of                                                                                                                                  |
| [39]      | medicine for space flight. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag; 2008. p. 101                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|           | clinical symptoms during long duration orbital spaceflight. Int J Gen Med 2016;9:383 - 9.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| [41]      | Torres T, Ferreira EO, Gonçalo M, Mendes-Bastos P, Selores M, Filipe P. Update on atopic dermatitis. Acta Med Port 2019;32(9):606 - 13.                                                                                                                                                                     |

- [42] Li Y, Li L. Contact dermatitis: classifications and management. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 2021;61(3):245 -81.

|                               | [43] Johansen JD, Bonefeld CM, Schwensen JFB, Thyssen JP, Uter W. Novel insights into contact dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2022;149(4):1162 - 71.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [44]                          | Seitzer U, Bodo M, Muller PK, Açil Y, Bätge B. Microgravity and hypergravity effects on collagen biosynthesis of human dermal fibroblasts. Cell Tissue Res 1995;282(3):513 - 7.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| [45]                          | Arora S. Aerospace dermatology. Indian J Dermatol 2017;62(1):79.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| [46]                          | Barratt MR, Pool SL. Principle of clinical medicine for space flight. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag; 2008.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [47]                          | Nicogossian AE, Parker JF. Space physiology and medicine. Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA); 1982.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| [48]                          | airborne fungi (Note). Appl Environ Microbiol 1996;62(5):1835 - 8.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|                               | Mehta SK, Mishra SK, Pierson DL. Evaluation of 3 portable samplers for monitoring                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                               | James JT. Environmental health monitoring results for STS40/Space Life Sciences 1 (SLS-1). In: Spacelab Life Sciences-1 Final Report, Volume 1. Houston, TX: NASA - Johnson Space Center; 1994 JSC-26786.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| [49]                          | Pierson DL, James J, Russo D, Limero T, Beck S, Groves T. 1989-1995. Environmental                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|                               | Health. In: Extended Duration Orbiter Medical Project. Final Report. NASA/SP 1999-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| [50]                          | 534, Section 4, pp. 4-11.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                               | Nicogossian AE, LaPinta CK, Burchard EC, et al. Crew health. In: Nicogossian AE,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| [51] [52]                     | editor. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project: Medical Report. Washington, DC: NASA Headquarters; 1977 NASA SP-411. Eyer P. Gases. In: Marquaardt H, Schafer SG, McClellan RO, Welsch F, editors. Toxicology. New York, NY: Academic Press; 1999. p. 805 - 32.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] | WongKL.Ammonia.In:NationalResearch Council Committee on Toxicology, editors, Spacecraft maximum allowable concentrations for selected airborne contaminants, Volume 1. Washington, DC: National Academy; n.d. ATSDR. Toxicological profile for formaldehyde. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services; 1999. p. 39 - 59. Paulsen K, Thiel C, Timm J, Schmidt PM, Huber K, Tauber S, et al. Microgravity- induced alterations in signal transduction in cells of the immune system. Acta Astronaut 2010;67:1116 - 25. Kaur I, Simons ER, Castro VA, Mark Ott C, Pierson DL. Changes in neutrophil functions in astronauts. Brain Behav Immun 2004;18:443 - 50. Stervbo U, Roch T, Kornprobst T, Sawitzki B, Grütz G, Wilhelm A, et al. Gravitational stress during parabolic flights reduces the number of circulating innate and adaptive leukocyte subsets in human blood. PLoS One 2019;13:e020627. Paul AM, Mhatre SD, Cekanaviciute E, Schreurs AS, Tahimic CGT, Globus RK, et al. Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio: a biomarker to monitor the immune status of astronauts. Front Immunol 2020;11:1 - 12. |
| [62]                          | Mehta SK, Crucian BE, Stowe RP, Simpson RJ, Ott CM, Sams CF, et al. Reactivation of latent viruses is associated with increased plasma cytokines in astronauts. Cytokine -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [59] [60]                     | Li Q, Mei Q, Huyan T, Xie L, Che S, Yang H, et al. Effects of simulated microgravity on primary human NK cells. Astrobiology 2013;13:703 - 14. Crucian BE, Stowe R, Quiriarte H, Pierson DL, Sams C. Monocyte phenotype and cytokine production profiles are dysregulated by short-duration spaceflight. Aviat Sp                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                               | astronaut microbiome. Sci Rep 2019;9:9911.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [61]                          | Nicholson IC. CD62L (L-selectin). J Biol Regul Homeost Agents 2002;16:144 - 6. Randolph GJ, Beaulieu S, Lebecque S, Steinman RM, Muller WA. Differentiation of monocytes into dendritic cells in a model of transendothelial trafficking. Science 1998;282:480 3. -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| [63]                          | Parham P, Ohta T. Population biology of antigen presentation by MHC class I molecules. Science 1996;272:67 - 74. Paulsen K, Tauber S, Gölz N, Simmet DM, Engeli S, Birlem M, et al. Severe disruption of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| [64]                          | the cytoskeleton and immunologically relevant surface molecules in a human -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| [65]                          | macrophageal cell line in microgravity Results of an in vitro experiment on board of the Shenzhou-8 space mission. Acta Astronautica 2014;94(1):277 - 92. Meloni MA, Galleri G, Pani G, Saba A, Pippia P, Cogoli-Greuter M. Space flight affects motility and cytoskeletal structures in human monocyte cell line J-111. Cytoskeleton 2011;68:125 37. -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| [66]                          | Thiel CS, Tauber S, Lauber B, Polzer J, Seebacher C, Uhl R, et al. Rapid morphological and cytoskeletal response to microgravity in human primary macrophages. Int J Mol ElGindi M, Sapudom J, Ibrahim IH, Al-Sayegh M, Chen W, Garcia-Sabaté A, et al. May                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| [67]                          | Sci 2019;20:2402.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| [68]                          | the Force Be with You (Or Not): the immune system under microgravity. Cells 2021;10 (8):1941. Tackett N, Bradley JH, Moore EK, Baker SH, Minter SL, DiGiacinto B, et al. Prolonged exposuretosimulated microgravity diminishes dendritic cell immunogenicity. Sci Rep                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                               | 2019;9:1 - 13. Low EK, Brudvik E, Kuhlman B, Wilson PF, Almeida-Porada G, Porada CD.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| [69]                          | Microgravity impairs DNA damage repair in human hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells and inhibits their differentiation into dendritic cells. Stem Cells Dev 2018;27:1257 67. -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| [70]                          | Tascher G, Gerbaix M, Maes P, Chazarin B, Ghislin S, Antropova E, et al. Analysis of femurs from mice embarked on board BION-M1 biosatellite reveals a decrease in immune cell development, including B cells, after 1 wk of recovery on Earth. FASEB J -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| [71] [72]                     | 2019;33:3772 83. Luo H, Wang C, Feng M, Zhao Y. Microgravity inhibits resting T cell immunity in an exposure time-dependent manner. Int J Med Sci 2013;11:87 - 96.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| [73]                          | Spielmann G, Agha N, Kunz H, Simpson RJ, Crucian BE, Mehta S, et al. B cell homeostasis is maintained during long-duration spaceflight. J Appl Physiol 2019;126:469 76. -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| [74]                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                               | 2013;61:205 9.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                               | Voorhies AA, Mark Ott C, Mehta S, Pierson DL, Crucian BE, Feiveson A, et al. Study of the impact of long-duration Space missions at the International Space Station on the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

## B. Godard

| [75]   | Garrett-Bakelman FE, Darshi M, Green SJ, Gur RC, Lin L, Macias BR, et al. The NASA Twins Study: a multidimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceflight. Science 2019364(6436) eaau8650364.                                                                                  |
|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [76]   | Petersen N, Jaekel P, Rosenberger A, Weber T, Scott J, Castrucci F, et al. Exercise in Space: the European Space Agency approach to in-flight exercise countermeasures for long-duration missions on ISS. Extrem Physiol Med 2016;5:9.                                            |
| [77]   | Loehr JA, Guilliams ME, Petersen N, Hirsch N, Kawashima S, Ohshima H. Physical training for long-duration spaceflight. Aerosp Med Hum Perform 2015;86(12 Suppl): A14 23. -                                                                                                        |
| [78]   | Hackney KJ, Scott JM, Hanson AM, English KL, Downs ME, Ploutz-Snyder LL. The astronaut-athlete: optimizing human performance in space. J Strength Cond Res 2015;29(12):3531 - 45.                                                                                                 |
| [79]   | Smith SM, Heer MA, Shackelford LC, Sibonga JD, Ploutz-Snyder L, Zwart SR. Benefits for bone from resistance exercise and nutrition in long-duration spaceflight: evidence                                                                                                         |
| [80]   | from biochemistry and densitometry. J Bone Miner Res 2012;27(9):1896 - 906. Loehr JA, Lee SM, English KL, Sibonga J, Smith SM, Spiering BA, et al. Musculoskeletal adaptations to training with the advanced resistive exercise device. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2011;43(1):146 - 56. |
| [81]   | Simpson RJ, Kunz H, Agha N, Graff R. Exercise and the regulation of immune functions. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2015;135:355 - 80.                                                                                                                                                 |
| [82]   | Gleeson M, Bishop NC, Stensel DJ, Lindley MR, Mastana SS, Nimmo MA. The anti- inflammatory effects of exercise: mechanisms and implications for the prevention and treatment of disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2011;11:607 - 15.                                                        |
| [83]   | Martin SA, Pence BD, Woods JA. Exercise and respiratory tract viral infections. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 2009;37:157 - 64.                                                                                                                                                             |
| [84]   | Walsh NP, Gleeson M, Shephard RJ, Gleeson M, Woods JA, Bishop NC, et al. Position statement. Part one: immune function and exercise. Exerc Immunol Rev 2011;17:6 - 63.                                                                                                            |
| [85]   | Kang M, Oh NS, Kim M, Ahn HY, Yoo HJ, Sun M, et al. Supplementation of fermented Maillard-reactive whey protein enhances immunity by increasing NK cell activity. Food Funct 2017;8:1718 - 25.                                                                                    |
| [86]   | Micke P, Beeh KM, Schlaak JF, Buhl R. Oral supplementation with whey proteins increases plasma glutathione levels of HIV-infected patients. Eur J Clin Invest 2001;31:171 8. -                                                                                                    |

| [87]   | Vanherwegen AS, Gysemans C, Mathieu C. Regulation of immune function by vitamin Danditsuseindiseases of immunity. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2017;46:1061 - 94.                                                                                                                                    |
|--------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [88]   | Molfino A, Gioia G, Fanelli F, Muscaritoli M. The role for dietary omega-3 fatty acids supplementation in older adults. Nutrients 2014;6:4058 - 72.                                                                                                                                                    |
| [89]   | Muid S, Abu Bakar NA, Abdul Rahman T, Tengku Ismail TS, Kholin SF, Suvorov AV, et al. Effects of prolonged isolation in a confined space on status of oxidative stress and prothrombogenesis: in preparation for possible future manned space expedition to Mars. Malays J Pathol 2019;41(3):283 - 92. |
| [90]   | Fetterman Jr JW, Zdanowicz MM. Therapeutic potential of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in disease. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2009;66(13):1169 - 79, doi:http://dx.doi. org/10.2146/ajhp080411.                                                                                                           |
| [91]   | Xu LN, Xu YY, Li GP, Yang B. Effect of postoperative omega-3 fatty acid immunonutritional therapy on NK cell gene methylation in elderly patients with gastric cancer. Curr Med Sci 2022;42(2):373 - 8, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/ s11596-022-2567-7.                                              |
| [92]   | Hawkins W, Zieglschmid J. Clinical aspects of crew health. Biomedical Results of Apollo. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V.; 1975. p. 43 - 81.                                                                                                                                                           |
| [93]   | Crucian BE, Choukèr A, Simpson RJ, Mehta S, Marshall G, Smith SM, et al. Immune system dysregulation during spaceflight: potential countermeasures for deep space exploration missions. Front Immunol 2018;9:1437.                                                                                     |
| [94]   | MakedonasG,MehtaSK,ScheuringRA,HaddonR,CrucianBE.SARS-CoV-2pandemic impacts on NASA ground operations to protect ISS astronauts. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2020;8(10):3247 - 50.                                                                                                                    |
| [95]   | Crucian BE, Makedonas G, Sams CF, Pierson DL, Simpson R, Stowe RP, et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|        | Countermeasures-based improvements in stress, immune system dysregulation and latent herpesvirus reactivation onboard the International Space Station - Relevance for deep Space missions and terrestrial medicine. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2020;115:68 -                                                |
| [96]   | 76. Klaus DM,HowardHN.Antibioticefficacyandmicrobialvirulenceduringspace flight. Trends Biotechnol 2006;24:131 - 6.                                                                                                                                                                                    |

- [97] Patel ZS, Brunstetter TJ, Tarver WJ, Whitmire AM, Zwart SR, Smith SM, et al. Red risks for a journey to The red planet: the highest priority human health risks for a mission to Mars. NPJ Microgravity 2020;6:33.