## Characterization and Regulation of Bv8 in Human Blood Cells

Cuiling Zhong, Xueping Qu, MarthaT an,Y . Gloria Meng, and Napoleone Ferrara

## Abstract

Purpose: Bv8, also known as prokineticin 2, has been recently shown to be a mediator of myeloid cell ^ dependent tumor angiogenesis in mouse models. We wished to determine whether these findings might be potentially relevant to human disease.

Experimental Design: We characterized Bv8 expression in human blood cells in vitro and in vivo , and did Bv8 immunohistochemistry in human tumor sections.We also partially purified Bv8 from human neutrophils and tested its bioactivity.

Results: We found that Bv8 expression is regulated by several cytokines in a cell type ^ specific fashion. Both granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor induced Bv8 expression in neutrophils and bone marrow cells, whereas interleukin 10 up-regulated Bv8 expression in monocytes and lymphocytes. Bv8 potently promoted neutrophil chemotaxis. Bv8 protein isolated from human neutrophils was found to be biologically active. Of the two receptors for Bv8 [prokineticin receptor 1(PKR1)/endocrine gland ^ derived vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (EG-VEGFR1) and PKR2/EGVEGFR2], only PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 was detectable inhumanneutrophils. Also, we found a marked up-regulation of Bv8 mRNA and protein in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from G-CSF ^treated donors compared with those from untreated individuals, verifying our in vitro observations. Finally, immunohistochemistry showed Bv8 expression in neutrophils infiltrating human tumors. Conclusions: These results provide the basis for further investigation of the pathophysiologic role of Bv8 in human tumors and inflammatory disorders and, potentially, for therapeuticapplic ation of Bv8 inhibitors.

The growth of new blood vessels, or angiogenesis, is essential to provide oxygen and nutrients to proliferating tissues (1, 2). Angiogenesis is required for tumor growth and also plays a key pathogenicrole in a variety of other disorders, inc luding age-related macular degeneration. There are several angiogenic activators, including members of the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and fibroblast growth factor gene families (3-6) and various inhibitors of angiogenesis (7). Tumor cells have long been thought to be the major source of angiogenic factors (8, 9). However, compelling evidence now supports the notion that the stroma, consisting of fibroblasts, pericytes, mesenchymal stem cells, and inflammatory-immune cells also contributes to tumor growth not only through the secretion of angiogenicfac tors but also by modulation of the immune system (10-13). In particular, several recent studies indicate that myeloid cells, including cells of granulocytic and monocytic lineages, promote tumor angiogenesis through the release of angiogenic factors such as VEGF-A (14-16). Also, choroidal neovascularization has been reported to be dependent, at least

in part, on neutrophil infiltration (17). Furthermore, myeloid cells defined by the expression of CD11b and Gr1 have been associated with suppression of immune function, and therefore are referred to also as myeloid-derived suppressor cells (18). Recent studies have shown that CD11b-positive Gr1-positive cells mediate refractoriness to anti-VEGF therapy in syngeneic murine tumor models (19, 20).

Endocrine gland-derived VEGF (EG-VEGF) and Bv8 are two highly related secreted proteins, also referred to as prokineticin1 and -2, which belong to a larger class of peptides defined by a five disulphide bridge motif called a colipase fold (21-26). Both bind two highly homologous G-protein-coupled receptors, prokineticin receptor 1 (PKR1)/EG-VEGF receptor 1 (EGVEGFR1) and PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 (27, 28). More recently, several important functions have been associated with Bv8 receptor signaling, including regulation of circadian rhythms (29), olfactory bulb neurogenesis, and survival of GnRH neurons (30, 31).

EG-VEGF and Bv8 have been previously shown to promote tissue-specific angiogenesis (24, 32) and hematopoietic cell mobilization (33). Unlike EG-VEGF, Bv8 is expressed by peripheral blood and bone marrow cells (33). We have previously shown that anti-Bv8 antibodies inhibit the growth of several tumor cell lines transplanted in mice by virtue of their ability to reduce peripheral mobilization of myeloid cells and locally suppress angiogenesis (34). In the course of these studies, we identified granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) as a major inducer of Bv8 expression in vivo and in vitro (34).

In this article, we aimed at characterizing Bv8 expression and regulation in human bone marrow cells, in various cell types

## Translational Relevance

Earlier studies from our laboratory identified the secreted Bv8 protein as a mediator of myeloid cell ^ dependent angiogenesis. Anti-Bv8 antibodies suppressed the growth of several tumor celllines transplantedinmice by virtue oftheir ability to reduce peripheral mobilization of myeloid cells and locally suppress angiogenesis. However, chemokines/ cytokines are known to display species-specific tissue distribution and/or cellular targets. Therefore, to establish the potential relevance of these observations to human disease, it was critical to characterize Bv8 expression in human bone marrow and mature blood cells, and document its bioactivity in human myeloid cells. Our findings showed that expression and regulationof Bv8 inhumanhematopoieticc ells are substantially c onserved relative to the mouse and also reveal novel activities of Bv8, providing the basis for further investigation of the pathophysiologicrole of Bv8 in human tumors and inflammatory disorders and, potentially, for therapeuticapplic ation of Bv8 inhibitors.

isolated from human peripheral blood. We also show the expression of Bv8 in tumor-infiltrating neutrophils. In addition, we investigated the effects of G-CSF on human Bv8 expression in vivo .

## Materials and Methods

Isolation of whole human bone marrow cells from fresh bone marrow collections. Fresh bone marrow samples were obtained from ALLCELLS. The bone marrow was first diluted with 10% fetal bovine serum-containing DMEM and then passed through a 40A m c ell strainer (BD Biosciences) to remove tissue debris. Cells were centrifuged at 1,200 rpm for 5 min and RBC were lysed in the presence of ice cold 0.2% NaCl for 30 s, followed by addition of ice cold 1.6% NaCl.

Isolation of neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes from peripheral blood. Isolation procedures were as previously described (35), with minor modifications. Briefly, fresh heparinized healthy human blood (Health Services, Genentech Inc.) was applied on CAPPEL LSM Lymphocyte Separation Medium (MP Biomedicals). After centrifugation at 3,000 rpm for 15 min without brake, the plasma was removed and monocytes were collected at the interphase. Monocytes were further purified using Monocyte isolation kit II (Miltenyi Biotec) and fluorescence-activated cell sorting. The purity of the cell population was evaluated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting by CD14-positive CD16-negative expression. Lymphocytes were harvested by collecting the cells binding to the column and their purity was examined by CD3 expression for T lymphocytes and CD19 expression for B lymphocytes. Neutrophils were collected by carefully removing the layer immediately above the RBC, followed by addition of HBSS (without Ca 2+ and Mg 2+ ) and 6% Dextran 500 (GE Healthcare Bio-sciences AB) prepared in 0.9% NaCl. After allowing RBC to settle for 30 to 60 min at room temperature, neutrophils in the supernatant were removed. Any residual RBC were further removed until &gt;90% of them were eliminated. The purity of the cells was evaluated by fluorescenceactivated cell sorting analysis as CD15-positive CD16-positive populations. All three populations from peripheral blood (neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes) were &gt;93% pure by fluorescence-

activated cell sorting and morphology. Cells were then washed once with HBSS containing 0.2% bovine serum albumin (BSA; low in endotoxin; Serologicals, Corp.) before use.

Gene expression analysis by Taqman. RNA was prepared using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). Fifty nanograms of total RNA per reaction were used for the real-time PCR (Taqman) analysis. For human Bv8 , testis RNA (BD Biosciences) served as control. Reactions were run on 9600 Emulation mode of 7500 Real time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) and the absolute quantification with standard curve was used with Sequence Detection System (SDS) software. The expression level of each gene was further quantified relative to the housekeeping gene RPL19 in the same sample. The sequences of Taqman primers are as follows: human Bv8 forward: ATG GCA CGG AAG CTA GGA, reverse: GCA GAG CTG AAG TCC TCT TGA, probe: TGC TGC TGG ACC CTT CCT AAA CCT; human RPL19 forward: CGC AAG CGC CGT GAA, reverse: GGT CTC TTC CTC CTT GGA TAA AGT C, probe: CCA GGC CAA GAA GGA GGA GAT CAT CA; human specific VEGF forward: AAT GAC GAG GGC CTG GAG T, reverse: TTG ATC CGC ATA ATC TGC ATG, probe: TGT GCC CAC TGA GGA GTC CAA CAT CA.

Taqman reagents for human PKR1/EG-VEGFR1 and PKR2/EGVEGFR2 were obtained from Applied Biosystems. The Taqman cycle number was 30-37 for PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 and 40 for PKR1/EG-VEGFR1 . Human hypothalamus was used as a positive control tissue for PKR2/ EG-VEGFR2 whereas human testis was used for PKR1/EG-VEGFR1 .

Regulation of Bv8 gene expression in cultured blood cells. Recombibinant human monocyte chemotactic protein 1, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1 a , MIP-1 h , MIP-2, basicfibroblast growth factor, VEGF-A, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), G-CSF, stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 a , macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), erythropoietin, and tumor necrosis factor a were purchased from R&amp;D Systems. Recombinant human interleukin (IL)-8, IFN g , Bv8 (prokineticin-2), IL-4, IL-10, IL-13, and transforming growth factorh were from PeproTech Inc. stem cell factor (SCF) was from Invitrogen Biosource. In some cases, G-CSF from Amgen (Neupogen/Filgrastim) was used. Most cytokines were added at a nearly maximally effective concentration, 10 ng/mL. Erythropoietin was tested at 10 U/mL. Freshly purified cells were washed and resuspended in HBSS media containing 0.2% BSA (low endotoxin; Serologicals Corp.). Two million cells were incubated in 24-well plates with various cytokines and chemokines for 4 h at 37 j C in a 5% CO2 incubator. Cells were then transferred into Eppendorf tubes, centrifuged, and lysed with RNA lysis buffer (Qiagen). Bv8 expression was assessed by Taqman with RPL19 (ribosomal protein L19) as the internal control gene.

Partial purification of Bv8 protein from peripheral blood neutrophils. Neutrophils from 500 mL of fresh human blood were isolated as described above. Cell pellets were suspended in 10 mL of 0.5% Triton X-100 with proteinase inhibitors (Roche) and lysed at 4 j C for 10 min on a shaker. Cell lysates were then forced through a 25gauge needle twice, and the salt concentration was adjusted to 50 mmol/L NaCl, 20 mmol/L Tris HCl (pH 7.3). The crude extract /C1 was applied to a heparin-Sepharose column (Hi-Trap 1 mL; Amersham Biosciences) preequilibrated with 20 mmol/L Tris (pH 7.2), 50 mmol/L NaCl, and 0.5% Triton X-100. The column was eluted using a linear gradient: 50 mmol/L to 2 mol/L NaCl in 20 mmol/L Tris, pH 7.3, in the presence of 0.5% Triton X-100. The flow rate was 1 mL/min. Absorbance was monitored at 280 nm. Fractions of 1 mL were collected and assayed for human Bv8 by ELISA. Peak Bv8 fractions and several off-peak fractions were then pooled and concentrated up to 10-fold using Microcon Centrifugal Filter Devices, Ultracel YM-3 (Millipore) and tested for their biological activity.

Human Bv8 ELISA. MaxiSorp 96-well microwell plates (Nalge Nunc International) were coated with 1.0 A g/mL mouse anti-human Bv8 monoclonal antibody 3F1 (32) in 50 mmol/L carbonate buffer, pH 9.6, at 4 C overnight. j Plates were washed with PBS containing 0.05% polysorbate 20 and blocked with 0.5% BSA, 15 parts per million

(p.p.m.) Proclin 300 (Supelco) in PBS at room temperature for 1 h. After plates were washed, human Bv8 standards (0.020-2.5 ng/mL in 2fold serial dilution; PeproTech) and samples (minimum 1:10 dilution) in PBS containing 0.5% BSA, 0.05% polysorbate 20, 15 p.p.m. Proclin 300 and 0.35N NaCl (sample buffer) were serially diluted and were added to each well. The plates were incubated for 2 h at room temperature followed by a washing step. The bound Bv8 was detected by adding the secondary antibody, a biotinylated hamster anti-human Bv8 antibody 3B8 (Genentech Inc.), followed by adding streptavidinhorseradish peroxidase (GE Healthcare) and 3,3 ,5,5 -tetramethyl ¶ ¶ benzidine (Kirkegaard &amp; Perry Laboratories) as the substrate. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 mol/L phosphoric acid. Absorbance was read at 450 nm on a ThermoMax microplate reader (Molecular Devices). The titration curves of the standards were calculated using a four-parameter regression curve-fitting program (Genentech Inc). Human Bv8 concentration was calculated by extrapolating the optical density values of samples to the data range in the standard curve. The Bv8 ELISA was capable of measuring up to 10% lysis buffer and had the sensitivity to detect Bv8 as low as 0.20 ng/mL in tissue lysates. The ELISA was specifically developed and optimized for Bv8 because human EG-VEGF, VEGF-A, VEGF-C, and G-CSF (R&amp;D Systems) up to 30 A g/mL only gave a background signal; the presence of these molecules and anti-VEGF up to 30 A g/mL did not affect detection of 100 pg/mL human Bv8 in sample buffer.

Bv8 bioactivity assay. GeneBLAzer NFAT-CHO cells were obtained from Invitrogen Corporation. Briefly, Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells stably expressing the h -lactamase gene under the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) promoter were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. NFAT-CHO cells expressing PKR-1 cDNA were established as previously described (34). Cells were plated into 96well Viewplate (Packard) at the density of 2.5 /C2 10 4 in 80 A L/well in DMEM containing 1% fetal bovine serum overnight in 5% CO2, 37 j C. On the following day, cells were treated for 1 h with various column fractions which had been concentrated with Microcon Centrifugal Filter Devices (Ultracel YM-3) from Millipore. Human Bv8 (0.2-200 ng/mL) dissolved in DMEM with 1% fetal bovine serum was used as a positive control. To assess the specificity of the effects of the fractions, anti-Bv8 antibodies 2B9 and 3F1 (32) were each added at the concentration of 10 A g/mL each. One hour later, media were removed and replaced with 80 A L Hank's solution containing 0.1% BSA and 6 /C2 loading buffer containing 1 mmol/L CCF4 (Invitrogen Corporation). Plates were incubated for 1.5 h at room temperature in the dark and read on Wallac plate reader at excitation wavelength of 410 nm and emission wavelength of 450/520 nm. Under no/low h -lactamase expression, CCF2-AM is intact and the majority of cells appear green. When Bv8 binds to its receptor expressed on the cell surface, intracellular Ca 2+ level increases, leading to h -lactamase expression. In the presence of h -lactamase, CCF2-AM is cleaved and fluorescence resonance energy transfer between two fluorophores occurs, leading to emission of blue light. The ratio of blue signal versus green signal is used to assess the activity of the pathway. Negative controls were cells incubated without a ligand or with an irrelevant ligand (VEGF-A).

Analysis of WBC from G-CSF-treated donors. G-CSF-mobilized peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were obtained from normal donors after 4 to 5 d of G-CSF treatment (10-16 A g/kg/d) by apheresis collections (Cellular Therapy and Cell Processing Facilities, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center). PBMC from untreated individuals were collected by the same procedure and served as unpaired controls. PBMC were then concentrated and resuspended in cryoprotective media with human serum albumin plus 10% DMSO. After thawing in a 37 j C water bath, cell viability was &gt;95% by trypan blue exclusion test. Cells were briefly washed with HBSS buffer containing 0.2% BSA and lysed either in RNA lysis buffer (Qiagen) for RNA extraction or radio immunoprecipitation assay buffer containing proteinase inhibitors (Roche) for protein measurements. To further identify which cell type(s) is (are) responsible for the change in gene

expression, Taqman analysis was done on RNA from isolated lymphocytes and monocytes of untreated and G-CSF-mobilized individuals (ALLCELLS Inc.).

Chemotaxis of peripheral blood neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes. 10 6 cells were washed with HBSS containing 0.2% BSA before being put into transwell insert with 5A m pore size (Corning Incorporated). In the lower chamber, media alone or media with various cytokines at various concentrations (maximum at 200 ng/mL) were added. After 3 h at 37 C, j cells in the lower chamber were transferred, mixed with 9 mL ZPAK solution, and counted on Z2 Coulter Particle Count and Size Analyzer (Beckman Coulter). Twenty nanomolars of SDF1 a were used as the positive control. In some experiments, reconstituted Bv8 solution was first heat-inactivated at 95 C j for 15 min. To determine the cellular signaling pathway(s) involved in Bv8-induced chemotaxis, human neutrophils were first incubated with 10 A mol/L of the phosphoinositide 3 (PI3) kinase inhibitor LY294002 or the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) inhibitor PD 98059 (Calbiochem) for 30 min before initiating the migration assay.

Bv8 immunohistochemistry. Neutral-buffered paraffin-embedded 5A m-thick tumor sections were dewaxed and rehydrated. After antigen retrieval using universal decloaker buffer (Biocare Medical), sections were blocked with peroxidase blocking reagent (DAKO) for 5 min, and then protein block solution (DAKO) was added for 30 min. Sections were incubated with mouse anti-hBv8 antibody 3F1 (34) or mouse IgG1 (BD Parmingen) at 10 A g/mL for 1 h at room temperature. Next, sections were stained with biotinylated goat anti-mouse antibody at 5 A g/mL (Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 30 min at room temperature, followed by incubation with LSAB streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase (DAKO) for 10 min. Sections were then incubated with peroxidase substrate solution (liquid DAB; DAKO) until the desired signal intensity was developed. Finally, sections were light-counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, and coverslipped.

Statistical analysis. Independent-sample t -test was done and means were compared for statistical significance. The significance was further confirmed using one-way ANOVA and post hoc test. Data are expressed as means F SD and P &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Results

Regulation of Bv8 in human bone marrow and various blood cells. We previously reported that G-CSF results in a dramatic up-regulation (&gt;30-fold) of Bv8 expression in mouse bone marrow cells and peripheral neutrophils (34). In the present study, we evaluated whether G-CSF is also an inducer of Bv8 expression in isolated human peripheral neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes, and whole bone marrow cells. G-CSF of 10 ng/mL resulted in an average of 7-fold (range, 6- to 12-fold) induction of Bv8 expression within 4 hours. The lower fold increase compared with mouse neutrophils may be due, at least in part, to a higher basal Bv8 expression in human cells (data not shown). Time-course studies indicated that G-CSF induces Bv8 mRNA within 4 hours, and the effect was sustained for up to 24 hours (data not shown). We identified GM-CSF as an additional positive regulator of Bv8 expression in human bone marrow cells and neutrophils (Fig. 1A and B). A significant f 2.5-fold increase in Bv8 expression was observed with 10 ng/mL GM-CSF. This is unlike mouse neutrophils that show no Bv8 induction by GM-CSF. Other cytokines tested, including IL-6, IL-1 h , and erythropoietin, had no stimulatory effect on human Bv8 expression in neutrophils or bone marrow cells.

Unlike neutrophils, monocytes and lymphocytes did not show any significant change in Bv8 expression in response to G-CSF (Fig. 1C and D). IL-10 up-regulated Bv8 expression in

monocytes and lymphocytes, whereas SDF-1 a showed only a modest stimulatory effect ( P &lt; 0.06) on monocytes (Fig. 1C and D). A lower basal level of Bv8 expression was found in monocytes and lymphocytes compared with neutrophils or bone marrow cells (data not shown). None of the cytokines and chemokines tested affected VEGF expression in such cells (data not shown).

In conclusion, the effects of G-CSF and GM-CSF on Bv8 gene expression in neutrophils were quite unique, because two other factors involved in myeloid cell mobilization, M-CSF and SCF, had no effect.

Regulation of Bv8 receptors in human bone marrow cells and neutrophils. Unlike mouse neutrophils, which express both PKR1/EG-VEGFR1 and PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 , isolated human

Fig. 1 . Regulation of Bv8 expression in vitro using purified human blood cells and fresh bone marrow cells. Cells were incubated with various cytokines or chemokines at 10 ng/mL (or10 U/mL for erythropoietin) for 4 h before RNA extraction andT aqman analysis for Bv8 expression. Data were normalized as fold change, withuntreated sample being1.Twenty-five different healthy donors without medication were used for the study of neutrophils, 35 for monocytes and lymphocytes, and 1 2 for bone marrow cells as described in Materials and Methods. Representative images of purified cells and their marker expressions by fluorescence-activated cell sorting are shown at the right. A, bone marrow cells, ( B ) neutrophils, ( C ) monocytes, and ( D ) T- and B-lymphocytes. *** P &lt; 0.01 , ** P &lt; 0.05 versus untreated control.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2. Regulation of Bv8 receptor PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 expression by various G-CSF ^ related cytokines in human bone marrow cells and neutrophils. A, fresh isolated neutrophils or ( B ) bone marrow c ells were inc ubated with various hematopoieticgrowth fac tors. After 4 h inc ubation in vitro , cells were harvested, RNAwas extracted, and PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 expression was measured byT aqman. RPL19 was used as internal control gene for normalization. Experiments were done using three independent healthy donors. Response to cytokines from each individual donor is shown and the average expression level from all three donors is plotted in the inserted panels. *** P &lt; 0.01versus untreated control.

<!-- image -->

neutrophils express at detectable level only PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 . The Taqman cycle number was 30-37 for PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 and 40 for PKR1/EG-VEGFR1 . After 4 hours' incubation in vitro , GM-CSF, but not G-CSF, elicited a significant up-regulation of PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 expression (with an average of 4-fold induction; Fig. 2A). In human bone marrow, both G-CSF and GM-CSF seemed to regulate PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 to a significant level (Fig. 2B).

Up-regulation of Bv8 and PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 in mobilized peripheral mononuclear cells from donors treated with GCSF. PBMCs from 11 untreated and 12 G-CSF-treated individuals were obtained via apheresis collections. We examined Bv8 gene expression by Taqman and also measured the Bv8 protein level by ELISA. About 4.5-fold increase in Bv8 expression and a 10-

fold increase in protein level were detected in G-CSF-mobilized mononuclear cells compared with mononuclear cells from untreated donors (Fig. 3A and B). Similarly, PKR2/EG-VEGFR2, but not PKR1/EG-VEGFR1, was detectable in clinical collected mononuclear cells from individuals treated with G-CSF for 4 to 5 days. Mononuclear cells from G-CSF-treated donors showed a significant induction of PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 expression ( f 2-fold) compared with untreated control samples (Fig. 3C).

To further define which cell population(s) in PBMCs treated with G-CSF contributed to the change in Bv8 expression, Taqman analysis was done using RNAs purified from monocytes, T lymphocytes, and B lymphocytes from three independent G-CSF-mobilized or non-mobilized donors. As shown in Fig. 3D, a significant increase in Bv8 expression was observed in both unsorted mononuclear cells and monocytes. We were unable to observe significant up-regulation of Bv8 in isolated monocytes in vitro (Fig. 1C); G-CSF may regulate Bv8 expression in these long-term G-CSF-mobilized monocytes through an indirect mechanism.

Bv8 produced by human neutrophils is biologically active. To characterize the Bv8 protein, we solubilized peripheral human neutrophil pellets in 0.5% Triton X-100. Neutrophil lysates were then subjected to heparin-Sepharose affinity chromatography as described in Materials and Methods. As illustrated in Fig. 4A, Bv8 bound to the column and was eluted in the presence of f 0.4 mol/L NaCl, similar to the mouse Bv8 protein (34). This is consistent with a high degree of homology between mouse and human Bv8 proteins (25). ELISA data further confirmed the presence of Bv8 in fractions 9, 10, and 11 (Fig. 4A).

Because even trace amounts of Triton X-100 were found to be significantly cytotoxic to endothelial cells in proliferation assays, we sought to test the activity of the neutrophil-derived Bv8 protein in an assay that requires shorter stimulation times. We took advantage of CHO cells stably expressing PKR1/EGVEGFR1 to detect Bv8-induced activation of the G-protein coupled receptor signaling pathway (GeneBLAzer h -lactamase reporter technology), as described in Materials and Methods. As expected, recombinant human Bv8 (0.2-200 ng/mL) elicited a dose-dependent stimulation (Fig. 4B). As shown in Fig. 4C, column fractions containing immunoreactive Bv8 induced a significant stimulation compared with Triton X-100 buffer control. However, side fractions devoid of immunoreactive Bv8 showed no stimulatory effect. Also, anti-Bv8 antibodies blocked the stimulation by pooled Bv8-containing fractions. VEGF-A, tested up to 200 ng/mL, did not elicit any response, further confirming the specificity of the effects.

Effects of Bv8 on neutrophil migration. We examined the possibility that Bv8 may have chemotactic effects on human neutrophils. As illustrated in Fig. 5, Bv8 induced a significant stimulation of chemotaxis, with a maximal effect f 3-fold above control. Interestingly, the maximal stimulation occurred at a very low Bv8 concentration ( f 2 pmol/L). A similar pattern was observed in all tested donors (Fig. 5A). Other chemotactic factors such as, SDF-1 a , IL-8, and G-CSF required higher concentrations in order to stimulate neutrophil migration (data not shown). VEGF and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 did not show any effect at the concentrations tested (20 pmol/L and 20 nmol/L; data not shown). Under the same experimental condition, Bv8 did not promote migration of human monocytes or lymphocytes (Fig. 5B).

To identify the signaling transduction pathway(s) that mediates such effects, freshly isolated neutrophils were treated with a pharmacologic inhibitor of ERK or PI3 kinase for 30 minutes prior to the chemotaxis assay. In the presence of 10 A mol/L LY294002 or 10 A mol/L PD98059, cells were unable to respond to Bv8 (0.28-200 pmol/L), suggesting that both pathways are involved (Fig. 5C). At the same concentrations, none of these inhibitors affected cell viability during the entire assay period (data not shown).

To rule out the possibility that a heat-stable contaminant such as LPS might be responsible for the observed chemotactic effects, Bv8 was heated at 95 j C for 15 minutes. Data shown in Fig. 5D indicated that heat inactivation completely abolished the ability of Bv8 to induce neutrophil chemotaxis compared with its active counterpart, arguing against the possibility that the activity was due to trace amounts of LPS.

Expression of Bv8 in tumor-infiltrating neutrophils. To further evaluate Bv8 expression and localization under pathologic conditions, we did Bv8 immunohistochemistry in a panel of human tumors. We found that Bv8 was detectable in the majority of tumors, depending on the degree of neutrophil infiltration as assessed by light microscopy. A detailed analysis of Bv8 expression in human tumors will be presented elsewhere. Figure 6 illustrates Bv8 expression in a primary lung

adenocarcinoma. High magnification shows that the immunostaining is associated with the infiltrating cells, predominantly neutrophils as assessed by nuclear morphology (Fig. 6B and C). No signal was obtained using mouse IgG1 (Fig. 6A), confirming the specificity of the staining.

## Discussion

Neutrophils and other myeloid cells are best known for their role in innate immunity, providing the first line of protection against pathogens (36). Also, the participation of these cells in a variety of acute and chronic inflammatory processes is well established (37). Furthermore, the link between inflammatory cells and cancer, which was originally proposed in the 19th century, has recently received wide experimental and clinical support (reviewed in refs. 10, 38). Secretion of a variety of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines may directly promote tumor growth and angiogenesis. Furthermore, tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells may facilitate tumor growth by virtue of their ability to down-regulate the immune responses in subtypes of T cells, including CD4-positive and CD8-positive cells, hence the denomination of myeloid-derived suppressor cells for at least a subset of CD11b-positive Gr1-positive cells (reviewed in refs. 39, 40).

Fig. 3. Bv8 and PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 are up-regulated in mononuclear cells from G-CSF ^ treated donors. Mononuclear cells from G-CSF ^ treated ( n = 12) and untreated individuals ( n = 1 1 ; unpaired) were briefly washed and pelleted before RNA extraction or lysis with radio immunoprecipitation assay buffer containing proteinase inhibitors.T aqman analysis on Bv8 ( A ), PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 expression ( C ), and spec ific human Bv8 ELISA ( B ) were carried out. ForT aqman, data were normalized against RPL19 expression. ELISA data were normalized to total protein concentrations.T o identify which cell population(s) was responsible for the change of gene expression, RNAs extracted from purified monocytes and lymphocytes ( n = 3) from untreated or G-CSF ^ treated individuals were used ( D ). *** P &lt; 0.01versus untreated control.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4. Characterization of the Bv8 protein produced by human neutrophils. A, human neutrophils were isolated and lysed as described in Materials and Methods.The lysate was applied to a heparin-Sepharose column, as described. fractions 9, 10 and 1 1 , eluted in the presence of f 0.4 mol/L NaCl, had the highest Bv8 concentrations. Data shown are representative of three independent isolations. B, dose-dependent activity of purified Bv8 using GeneBLAzer NFAT-CHO cells transfected with PKR1/ EG-VEGFR1as described in Materials and Methods. Data were normalized as fold change, with assay buffer wells being 1 . C, activity of column fractions using GeneBLAzer NFAT-CHO cells transfected with PKR1/EG-VEGFR1. Recombinant human Bv8 (200 ng/mL) served as a positive control. HumanVEGF-A at 200 ng/mL was used as a negative control. The specificity of Bv8 immunoreactive fractions was further confirmed using anti-Bv8 antibodies. Data were normalized as fold change, with untreated wells being1 . *** P &lt; 0.01versus untreated or buffer control. Three independent studies were done, with similar results.

<!-- image -->

Recent studies have tested the hypothesis that myeloid cells may also play a role in mediating refractoriness to VEGF blocking agents in tumor models (19). Anti-VEGF refractory tumors were associated with a significant increase in the frequency of tumor-infiltrating CD11b-positive Gr1-positive cells, compared with sensitive ones (19). In evaluating the mechanism of VEGF-independent angiogenesis mediated by CD11b-positive Gr1-positive cells, the orthologue of the secreted protein Bv8 was identified as a critical regulator (34). These studies provided evidence that Bv8 is a mediator of myeloid cell mobilization and angiogenesis during tumor development in mice, not only in xenografts (34), but also in a transgenic mouse model of cancer progression (41).

There are several examples of chemokines/cytokines having species-specific tissue distribution and/or cellular targets (42). In this context, the Bv8 homologue EG-VEGF has a different

expression pattern in human compared with mouse tissues (43). Therefore, to establish the potential relevance of our earlier observations (19, 34, 41) to human disease, it was critical to characterize Bv8 expression in human bone marrow and mature blood cells. Our analysis indicates that the regulation of Bv8 expression in human blood cells by various cytokines is cell type-specific. Similar to the mouse, the highest Bv8 expression was in bone marrow cells and neutrophils, whereas a lower level was detected in monocytes and lymphocytes.

The relevance of the current study to human cancer is further suggested by immunohistochemical data documenting strong Bv8 expression in tumor-infiltrating neutrophils. Potentially, Bv8 produced by such cells may perform similar proangiogenic roles as those recently described in mouse tumor models (34). It is also tempting to speculate that circumstances that promote

mobilization and tumor homing of neutrophils, such as cytotoxic chemotherapy or radiation therapy, will increase Bv8 levels in tumors providing a VEGF-independent angiogenic pathway. Further studies are required to test this hypothesis.

To verify that the Bv8 protein is biologically active, we partially purified Bv8 from human neutrophils and documented its activity in a bioassay. Furthermore, in the present study we identified a novel activity of Bv8, the ability to promote neutrophil migration at very low concentrations in vitro , suggesting that Bv8, potentially from sources other

than neutrophils, may physiologically regulate neutrophil migration. The use of pharmacologic inhibitors indicates that both ERK and PI3 kinase pathways are involved in mediating this effect of Bv8. These findings are consistent with our earlier studies showing that both the mitogen-activated protein kinase and PI3 kinase pathways are implicated in endothelial cell migration and proliferation induced by EG-VEGF (44).

The finding that neutrophils respond to Bv8 in spite of the fact that they represent a major source of Bv8 itself may seem counterintuitive. However, there are other examples of

Fig. 5. Migration of neutrophils in response to Bv8. A, 10 6 neutrophils suspended in HBSS containing 0.2% BSAwere placed in transwell inserts with 5A mpore size. Media alone or media with purified recombinant human Bv8 (0.2 pmol/L-20 nmol/L) were added to the lower chamber. After 3 h at 37 C, cells in the lower chamber were counted j and data were further normalized as fold increase, with untreated samples being1 . Representative data from six healthy donors are shown. B, compared with neutrophils ( n = 10), no effect of Bv8 at concentrations 0.2 pmol/L to 20 nmol/L on monocyte and lymphocyte ( n = 3) migration was observed, with 20 nmol/L SDF-1 a as the positive control. C, two different signal transduction pathways seem to be involved in Bv8-induced migration of neutrophils at low concentrations. Freshly isolated neutrophils were pretreated with10 A mol/L of either LY294002 or PD98059 for 30 min before setting up the migration assay. Cell viability was evaluated in parallel with the migration study. D, heat inactivation abolished Bv8 chemotactic activity toward neutrophils. Bv8 stock solution was first heated at 95 C for15 min before being added to the cells. Similar results j were obtained using two different donors. *** P &lt; 0.01 .

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. Neutrophil infiltration and Bv8 expression in a human lung adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry using anti-human Bv8 monoclonal antibody 3F1det ected strong Bv8 signals ( B and C ) in tumor sections, whereas mouse IgG1did not detect any signal ( A ). Bv8 expression is associated with infiltrating cells, predominantly neutrophils, which are indicated by arrows. C is a higher magnification of the boxed area in B . Sc ale bars: 20 A m.The sample is an adenocarcinoma of the lung from a 37-year-old Caucasian male.

<!-- image -->

expression and responsiveness to a cytokine by the same cell type. In this context, macrophages are a source of VEGF-A and yet these cells have been characterized also for their ability to migrate in response to a gradient of VEGF through VEGFR-1 activation (reviewed in ref. 45). Depending on the context and the extracellular levels of VEGF, macrophages may be proangiogenic or VEGF-mobilized (9, 45). It is conceivable that similar principles apply to the Bv8 system. Bv8 produced by neutrophils within the tumor might attract additional neutrophils into the tumor mass and at the same time promote angiogenesis locally. In addition, we show that of the two receptors for Bv8, only PKR2/EG-VEGFR2 was expressed in both isolated human neutrophils and G-CSF-mobilized PBMCs, suggesting that this is indeed the main receptor implicated in the hematopoietic effects of Bv8.

G-CSF was the main inducer of Bv8 expression in neutrophils and bone marrow cells, although it had no effect on monocytes and lymphocytes. Importantly, Bv8 up-regulation could be also shown in vivo, as assessed by the increased expression in PBMC from G-CSF-treated donors relative to PBMC from untreated individuals. G-CSF can be produced by stromal cells, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells within the tumor microenvironment (46). Up-regulation of Bv8 in human neutrophils and bone marrow cells by GM-CSF was intriguing, because this factor did not elicit such effect in mouse bone marrow cells and neutrophils. Indeed, both G-CSF and GM-CSF are known to modulate proliferation, differentiation, survival, and maturation of neutrophils and monocytes from bone marrow. Furthermore, several reports suggest that colony-stimulating

## References

- 1. Risau W, Flamme I. Vasculogenesis. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1995;1 1:73^91 .
- 2. Red-Horse K, Crawford Y , Shojaei F, Ferrara N. Endothelium-microenvironment interactions in the developing embryo and in the adult. Dev Cell 2007;1 2: 181^94.
- 3. Ferrara N.VEGF and the quest for tumour angiogenesis factors. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:795^803.
- 4. Ferrara N, Kerbel RS. Angiogenesis as a therapeutic target. Nature 2005;438:967^74.

- 5. Ellis LM, Hicklin DJ.VEGF-targeted therapy: mechanisms of anti-tumour activity. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8: 579^91.
- 6. Kerbel RS. T umor angiogenesis. N Engl J Med 2008; 358:2039^49.
- 7. Nyberg P, Xie L, Kalluri R. Endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis. Cancer Res 2005;65:3967^79.
- 8. Ferrara N, Gerber HP, LeCouter J. The biology of VEGF and its receptors. Nature Med 2003;9:669^76.
- 9. Ferrara N. Vascular endothelial growth factor: basic

factors may promote malignant growth, at least in some experimental model systems (47-49).

IL-10 significantly up-regulated Bv8 expression in human monocytes and lymphocytes. Interestingly, much evidence supports a role for tumor infiltrating macrophages and lymphocytes in secreting angiogenic factors such as VEGF (50, 51). Therefore, Bv8 produced by these cell types may contribute to angiogenesis and might also have additional regulatory roles that remain to be defined. Originally described as a cytokine produced by T helper 2 cells (52), IL-10 has been also implicated in angiogenesis (53, 54).

In conclusion, our studies showed that expression and regulation of Bv8 in human hematopoieticc ells are substantially conserved relative to the mouse, providing the basis for further investigation of the pathophysiologicrole of Bv8 in human tumors and inflammatory disorders and, potentially, for therapeuticapplic ation of Bv8 inhibitors.

## Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

All authors are employees and shareholders of Genentech Inc.

## Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Drs. S. Heimfeld and F. Appelbaum (F. Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA) for providing PBMCs from untreated and G-CSF-treated donors; Dr. F. Peale for the histopathologicanalysis; and the Genentec h Mic rosc opy Core Facility, the Oligonucleotide Synthesis Lab, the Flow Cytometry Facility, the Bioinformatics Department, Biostatistics Department, Human Tissue Bank and Health Services for support.

science and clinical progress. Endocr Rev 2004;25: 581^611.

- 10. Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer. Nature 2002;420:860^7.
- 11. BlankensteinT.The role of tumor stroma in the interaction between tumor and immune system. Curr Opin Immunol 2005;1 7:180^6.
- 12. Karnoub AE, Dash AB,Vo AP, et al. Mesenchymal stem cells within tumour stroma promote breast cancer metastasis. Nature 2007;449:557^63.

- 13. Orimo A,Weinberg RA. Stromal fibroblasts in cancer: a novel tumor-promoting cell type. Cell Cycle 2006;5:1597^601.
- 14. McLarenJ, Dealtry G, Prentice A, Charnock-Jones DS, Smith SK. Decreasedlevels of the potent regulator of monocyte/macrophage activation, interleukin-1 3, in theperitonealfluidofpatientswithendometriosis.Hum Reprod1997;12:1307^10.
- 15. Taichman NS, Young S, Cruchley AT, Taylor P, Paleolog E. Human neutrophils secrete vascular endothelial growth factor. JLeukoc Biol1997;62:397^400.
- 16. Nozawa H, Chiu C, Hanahan D. Infiltrating neutrophils mediate the initial angiogenicswitc h in a mouse model of multistage carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:12493^8.
- 17. ZhouJ, Pham L, Zhang N, et al. Neutrophils promote experimental choroidal neovascularization. Mol Vis 2005;1 1:414^24.
- 18. Gabrilovich D. Mechanisms and functional significance of tumour-induced dendritic-cell defects. Nat Rev Immunol 2004;4:941^52.
- 19. Shojaei F,Wu X, Malik AK, et al.T umor refrac toriness to anti-VEGF treatment is mediated by CD1 1 b+Gr1+ myeloid cells. Nat Biotechnol 2007;25:91 1^20.
- 20. Shojaei F, Zhong C,Wu X,Yu L, Ferrara N. Role of myeloid cells in tumor angiogenesis and growth. Trends Cell Biol 2008;18:372^8.
- 21. Boisbouvier J, Albrand JP, Blackledge M, et al. A structural homologue of colipase in black mamba venom revealed by NMR floating disulphide bridge analysis. J Mol Biol 1998;283:205^19.
- 22. Mollay C,Wechselberger C, Mignogna G, et al. Bv8, a small protein from frog skin and its homologue from snake venom induce hyperalgesia in rats. Eur J Pharmacol1999;374:189^96.
- 23. Li M, Bullock CM, Knauer DJ, Ehlert FJ, Zhou QY . Identification of two Prokineticin cDNAs: recombinant proteins potently contract gestrointestinal smooth muscle. Mol Pharmacol 2001 ;59:692^8.
- 24. LeCouterJ, KowalskiJ, FosterJ, et al. Identification of an angiogenicmitogen selec tive for endoc rine gland endothelium. Nature 2001 ;412:877^84.
- 25. LeCouter J, Lin R, T ejada M, et al. The endocrinegland-derivedVEGF homologue Bv8 promotes angiogenesis in the testis: Localization of Bv8 receptors to endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100: 2685^90.
- 26. KaserA,Winklmayr M, Lepperdinger G, Kreil G.The AVIT protein family. EMBO Rep 2003;4:469^73.
- 27. MasudaY,TakatsuY,T eraoY , et al. Isolation and identification of EG-VEGF/prokineticins as cognate ligands for two orphan G-protein-coupled receptors. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;293:396^402.
- 28. Lin DC, Bullock CM, Ehlert FJ, Chen JL, Tian H, Zhou QY . Identification and molecular characterization of two closely related G protein-coupled receptors activated by prokineticins/endocrine gland vascular endothelial growth factor. J Biol Chem 2002;277: 19276^80.
- 29. Cheng MY, Bullock CM, Li C, et al. Prokineticin 2 transmits the behavioural circadian rhythm of the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Nature 2002;41 7:405^10.
- 30. Ng KL, Li JD, Cheng MY, Leslie FM, Lee AG, Zhou QY. Dependence of olfactory bulb neurogenesis on prokineticin 2 signaling. Science 2005;308: 1923^7.
- 31. Matsumoto S,Yamazaki C, Masumoto KH, et al. Abnormal development of the olfactory bulb and reproductive system in mice lacking prokineticin receptor PKR2. ProcNatl Ac ad Sc i U S A 2006;103:4140^5.
- 32. LeCouterJ, Lin R, Frantz G, et al.The EG-VEGF homologue, Bv8, is a potent angiogenicfac tor. Loc alization of Bv8 receptors to endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:2685^90.
- 33. LeCouterJ, Zlot C,T ejada M, Peale F, Ferrara N. Bv8 and endocrine gland-derived vascular endothelial growth factor stimulate hematopoiesis and hematopoieticc ell mobilization. ProcNatl Ac ad Sc i U S A 2004;101:16813^8.
- 34. Shojaei F,Wu X, Zhong C, et al. Bv8 regulates myeloid cell-dependent tumour angiogenesis. Nature 2007;450:825^31.
- 35. Kulczycki A, Jr. Human neutrophils and eosinophils have structurally distinct Fc g receptors. J Immunol 1984;133:849^54.
- 36. BendelacA, Fearon DT. Innate pathways that control acquired immunity. Curr Opin Immunol 1997; 9:1^3.
- 37. O'Shea JJ, Murray PJ. Cytokine signaling modules in inflammatory responses. Immunity 2008;28: 477^87.
- 38. Lin WW, Karin M. A cytokine-mediated link between innate immunity, inflammation, and cancer. JClin Invest 2007;1 1 7:1 1 75 ^ 83.
- 39. Talmadge JE. Pathways mediating the expansion and immunosuppressive activity of myeloid-derived suppressor cells and their relevance to cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:5243^8.
- 40. Marigo I, Dolcetti L, Serafini P , Zanovello P , Bronte V. T umor-induced tolerance and immune suppression by myeloid derived suppressor cells. Immunol Rev 2008;222:162^79.
- 41. Shojaei F, Singh M,ThompsonJD, Ferrara N. Role of Bv8 in neutrophil-dependent angiogenesis in a transgenic model of cancer progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:2640^5.

- 42. Mantovani A. The chemokine system: redundancy for robust outputs. Immunol Today 1999;20: 254^7.
- 43. LeCouter J, Lin R, Frantz G, Zhang Z, Hillan K, Ferrara N. Mouse endocrine-gland derived vascular endothelial growth factor: a distinct expression pattern from its human ortholog suggests different roles as a regulator of organ-specific angiogenesis. Endocrinology 2003;144:2606^16.
- 44. Lin R, LeCouterJ, KowalskiJ, Ferrara N. Characterization of EG-VEGF signaling in adrenal cortex capillary endothelial cells. J Biol Chem 2002;277:8724^9.
- 45. Shibuya M.Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 (VEGFR-1/Flt-1 ): a dual regulator for angiogenesis. Angiogenesis 2006;9:225^30;discussion 231. Epub 2006 Nov16.
- 46. Basu S, Dunn A, Ward A. G-CSF: function and modes of action (Review). Int J Mol Med 2002;10: 3^10.
- 47. Karcher S, Steiner HH, Ahmadi R, et al. Different angiogenicphenotypes in primary and sec ondary glioblastomas. Int J Cancer 2006;1 18:2182^9.
- 48. Morales-Arias J, Meyers PA, Bolontrade MF, et al. Expression of granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor and its receptor in human Ewing sarcoma cells and patient tumor specimens: potential consequences of granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor administration. Cancer 2007;1 10:1568^77.
- 49. Okazaki T, Ebihara S, Asada M, Kanda A, Sasaki H, Y amaya M. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor promotes tumor angiogenesis via increasing circulating endothelial progenitor cells and Gr1+CD1 1 b+cells in cancer animal models. Int Immunol 2006;18:1^9.
- 50. Freeman MR, Schneck FX, Gagnon ML, et al. Peripheral blood T lymphocytes and lymphocytes infiltrating human cancers express vascular endothelial growth factor: a potential role forTcells in angiogenesis. Cancer Res 1995;55:4140^5.
- 51. Lewis C, Murdoch C. Macrophage responses to hypoxia: implications for tumor progression and anticancer therapies. Am JPathol 2005;167:627^35.
- 52. Boyman O, PurtonJF, Surh CD, SprentJ. Cytokines and T-cell homeostasis. Curr Opin Immunol 2007;19: 320^6.
- 53. Silvestre JS, Mallat Z, Duriez M, et al. Antiangiogenic effect of interleukin-10 in ischemia-induced angiogenesis in mice hindlimb. Circ Res 2000;87: 448^52.
- 54. SakamotoT, Saito H,T atebe S, et al. Interleukin-10 expression significantly correlates with minor CD8+ T-cell infiltration and high microvessel density in patients with gastric cancer. Int J Cancer 2006;1 18: 1909^14.