Reactive oxygen species (ROS). Chemically reactive molecules containing oxygen that, when produced in large amounts, have pro-inflammatory and antimicrobial effects. Physiological levels of ROS have been shown to regulate cellular signalling pathways.

1 Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA. 2 Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

*These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence to A.H. huttenlocher@wisc.edu

doi:10.1038/nri.2016.49 Published online 27 May 2016

## Neutrophil migration in infection and wound repair: going forward in reverse

Sofia de Oliveira 1 *, Emily E. Rosowski 1 * and Anna Huttenlocher 1,2

Abstract | Neutrophil migration and its role during inflammation has been the focus of increased interest in the past decade. Advances in live imaging and the use of new model systems have helped to uncover the behaviour of neutrophils in injured and infected tissues. Although neutrophils were considered to be short-lived effector cells that undergo apoptosis in damaged tissues, recent evidence suggests that neutrophil behaviour is more complex and, in some settings, neutrophils might leave sites of tissue injury and migrate back into the vasculature. The role of reverse migration and its contribution to resolution of inflammation remains unclear. In this Review, we discuss the different cues within tissues that mediate neutrophil forward and reverse migration in response to injury or infection and the implications of these mechanisms to human disease.

Neutrophils are the most abundant leukocytes in the blood, and they lead the first wave of host defence against infection or tissue damage. Neutrophils are power  ful effector cells that destroy infectious threats through phagocytosis, degranulation, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and neutrophil extracellular traps 1-3 . Neutrophil loss due to disease or therapy-induced side effects has devastating consequences that are characterized by recurrent severe infections. However, excess infiltration and activation of neutrophils at a site of tissue damage can cause chronic inflammation, limit injury repair and lead to loss of organ function 1,4 . Neutrophils mediate tissue damage through the release of cytokines, proteases and other factors contained in their cytoplasmic granules and also by regulating the activity of the adaptive immune response, including both B cell and T cell activation. Therefore, the migration and activation of neutrophils must be finely controlled. Recent advances in in vivo imaging techniques and new in vitro systems incorporating microfluidics and three-dimensional models have enabled researchers to directly visualize and quantify neutrophil behaviour (BOX 1) . These developments have spawned more complex studies regarding the role of neutrophils in the context of tissue homeostasis and disease, including wound healing, chronic inflammation, infection and cancer. As the role of neutrophils as key modulators of the immune response becomes clearer, it is becoming more important to understand neutrophil migration in the context of both acute and chronic inflammation and how migration is altered in disease.

This Review highlights the signals that regulate neutrophil migration in acute tissue damage during three main phases: an early neutrophil recruitment phase induced

by short-term signals, an amplification phase of neutrophil infiltration in response to more persistent signals and the resolution of inflammation, which may include neutrophil reverse migration . We also consider the differences and simi  larities between 'sterile' wound-induced and infection-  induced neutrophil infiltration. Finally, the potential therapeutic relevance of modulating either neutrophil forward or reverse migration is discussed.

## Neutrophil forward migration

Acute tissue damage generates a wide range of signals produced by complex networks that establish chemoattractant gradients throughout tissues. As 'leader' cells in host defence responses, neutrophils must sense, prioritize and integrate all of these chemotactic cues into a migration response towards the tissue damage 5,6 . In this section, we focus on the different signals that mediate neutrophil forward migration to a site of damage. This migration is thought to occur in phases (FIG. 1) : early neutro  phil recruitment (sometimes referred to as 'scouting'), followed by amplification of the response, which is mediated by both tissue-resident and early-recruited cells and results in robust neutrophil infiltration from the bloodstream 7,8 . The process of neutrophil extravasation from the vasculature into the tissue has recently been reviewed in detail 9,10 . Here, we highlight some of the signals in these phases, including damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), hydrogen peroxide (H O ), 2 2 lipid mediators and chemokines.

Neutrophils express more than 30 different receptors that can sense pro-inflammatory mediators and modu  late neutrophil migration, function and behaviour, including G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs),

## Box 1 | Imaging neutrophil migration

Using live imaging, substantial progress has been made in understanding the mechanisms that regulate neutrophil migration. Most of this work has involved the use of primary human or mouse neutrophils 140  or human-derived neutrophil-like cell lines (HL-60 (REF. 141) or PLB-985 (REF. 142) ). Microfluidic devices have been one of the most powerful recent tools used to study the movement of neutrophils in stable chemokine gradients 94,143-145 . Recent studies using microfluidics have highlighted mechanisms that differentially regulate neutrophil migration in two-dimensional compared with three-dimensional environments 146 . These in vitro studies are complemented by more recent work that images neutrophil migration within the tissue microenvironment in zebrafish and mice. Intravital imaging in mouse models has been developed to directly visualize and measure neutrophil migration and function in specific organs after acute tissue damage. These models mainly focus on peripheral tissues in mice that are amenable to imaging, including the cornea 147 , ear dermis 7,68 and cremaster muscle 110,148-150 . Other methods create 'windows' through which immune cell infiltration can be visualized in the brain 151 and the lungs 152 . Neutrophil recruitment to the liver has been studied for many years by externalizing it to allow for high-resolution intravital imaging 33,153,154 . Nevertheless, these models are invasive, often requiring animal sacrifice shortly after the experiment and are generally not amenable to long-term studies. In addition, these models do not provide high temporal and spatial resolution, making it difficult to analyse behaviours of early-recruited neutrophils.

Zebrafish have been increasingly used for the study of innate immune cell function, including neutrophil migration 155-157 . T ransparent larvae allow in vivo imaging of neutrophil migration in the context of a whole living organism on the scale of days. Zebrafish neutrophils have similar morphology, behaviour and function to mammalian neutrophils 158,159 , and zebrafish have been successfully used to model human neutrophil disorders 155,156 . With fluorescent tags, specific cells and subcellular structures can be visualized, and the use of tracking software enables researchers to easily measure multiple parameters of neutrophil motility, including speed and directionality, early after tissue damage. In fact, neutrophil reverse migration was first visualized in zebrafish 101 , and zebrafish are currently being used to elucidate the mechanisms controlling reverse migration 108 . Zebrafish larvae are ideal for screening chemical compounds - with such screens a fungal-derived compound that inhibits neutrophil chemotaxis 160 and a compound that promotes the resolution of neutrophil-mediated inflammation 107 were recently discovered.

## Neutrophil extracellular traps

(NETs). Fibrous networks that are released into the extracellular environment by neutrophils. They are mainly composed of DNA but also contain chromatin and proteins from neutrophil granules. NET s function as a mesh that traps microorganisms and exposes them to neutrophil-derived effector molecules.

## Neutrophil reverse migration

The movement of neutrophils away from injured tissues within the interstitium.

## Damage-associated molecular patterns

(DAMPs). Cues that are derived from stressed, damaged or dead cells. These factors are highly diffusible through tissues and can be protein-derived or non-protein-derived.

Fc receptors, adhesion receptors, cytokine receptors and pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) 11 . Many of these receptors can directly modulate neutrophil polarization and migration (BOX 2) . In addition to activating migration, the signalling pathways downstream of these receptors can affect neutro  phil transcriptional activity, phagocytosis, apoptosis, degranulation and ROS production 12 . These cues often converge on common intracellular signalling pathways through phosphoinositide 3-kinase-γ (PI3Kγ), phospho  lipase C β2 (PLCβ2) or PLCβ3 and/or extra  cellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signalling. These signalling pathways are discussed in more detail in BOX 2 and have recently been reviewed 6,11,13 . Importantly, the pool of exogenous signals that neutrophils respond to after wounding is complex and it is likely that no single cue is absolutely required for migration.

Detection of early signals by neutrophils. The first signals that are responsible for early neutrophil recruitment are released from damaged and necrotic cells after tissue injury and are likely to be DAMPs 14 . Neutrophils recognize DAMPs by specific PRRs, including Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and NOD-like receptors (NLRs). The wide range of DAMP molecules includes DNA, proteins (such as high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1)), N -formyl peptides, extracellular matrix components, ATP and uric

acid 15-17 . The exact signals that control this early stage in mice are mostly unknown but they are probably sensed by GPCRs, as treatment of neutrophils with pertussis toxin, which inhibits GPCR-Gα  signalling, limits this i early chemotaxis towards the damage site . The sig7 nals promoting the early recruitment of neutrophils have been investigated in more detail in larval zebrafish, as this model is amenable to live imaging of early neutrophil recruitment after tissue damage (BOX 1) .

In larval zebrafish, one of the main early signals known to be directly sensed by neutrophils after wounding and to promote early forward migration is H O . 2 2 After a tail wound in zebrafish up to a 200 μm radial gradient of H O is formed, beginning only three min2 2 utes after wounding, with levels peaking at 20 minutes post wounding 18 . A H O  gradient is also observed in 2 2 wounded Drosophila melanogaster embryos 19 . This early H2O2 gradient is primarily produced by the enzyme dual oxidase 1 (DUOX1) in epithelial cells, and depletion of this enzyme in either zebrafish or D. melanogaster inhibits neutrophil migration to a wound 18,19 . Importantly, H2O2 also promotes chemotaxis of human 20 and mouse 21 neutrophils in vitro . SRC family kinases (SFKs) directly sense this H O  gradient and are required in zebrafish for 2 2 early neutrophil recruitment to wounds and in human neutrophils for chemotaxis to H O 2 2 in vitro 20 . Upon H2O2 exposure, a specific cysteine residue in the zebrafish SFK LYN is oxidized, promoting the autophosphorylation and activation of LYN, and this activates multiple downstream pathways including ERK signalling 20 . The exact mechanism by which LYN directs the migration of neutrophils towards the source of H O  is unknown, 2 2 but it is likely that the signalling pathway converges on the activation of PI3K, RAC and ERK to mediate directed migration (BOX 2) . H O -LYN signalling seems 2 2 to be important only for early neutrophil recruitment in zebrafish 20 . Moreover, neutrophils from mice deficient in three SFKs that were transplanted into a wild-type animal were still able to infiltrate to a site of inflammation, although mice deficient in these SFKs are protected from autoantibody-induced arthritis because SFKs are necessary for the inflammatory microenvironment 22 .

The many DAMPs that are released from damaged and necrotic cells also function to directly modulate neutro  phils. For example, ATP can be sensed by two different classes of receptors, P2Ys (which are GPCRs) or P2Xs (which are ligand-gated ion channels) 23 . Zebrafish treated with apyrase or inhibitors of P2Y and P2X signalling have fewer neutrophils recruited to a wound 24 . Although ATP can directly induce monocyte and macrophage migration in vitro through the activation of P2Y purinoceptor 2 (P2Y ) 2 25 , it is unclear if ATP directly activates chemotaxis of neutrophils. It has been shown that neutrophil-released ATP can function as an autocrine signal at the leading edge of the cell to amplify chemo  tactic signals through P2Y  receptors and increase the efficiency 2 of chemotaxis 26 . The autocrine effects of ATP and its metabolite adenosine at the cell front and rear of neutrophils, through the P2Y  receptor and the A 2 2a receptor, respectively, promote efficient chemotaxis through differential effects on mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR)

## REVIEWS

Nature Reviews   Immunology | Figure 1 | The phases of neutrophil recruitment. The recruitment of neutrophils to a site of damage occurs in several phases. a |   Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) are released at a tissue injury site and promote the release of hydrogen peroxide (H O ) and direct the recruitment of early-recruited neutrophils through the SRC family kinase LYN. 2 2 b |   DAMPs also induce the production of CXC-chemokine ligand 8 (CXCL8) family chemokines and leukotrienes from surrounding tissue cells to further recruit neutrophils. c |   Early-recruited neutrophils are then activated, which directly and indirectly promotes further secretion of CXCL8 family chemokines and leukotriene B  (LTB ) to induce neutrophil recruitment 4 4 from the circulation and amplification of the response. d |   During an infection, additional signals exist to prolong and to amplify neutrophil infiltration, including the release of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and the involvement of other recruited immune cells, such as macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs) and T cells. 5-KETE, 5-oxo -eicosatetraenoic acid; CXCR, CXC-chemokine receptor; DUOX1, dual oxidase 1; ECM, extracellular matrix; GPCR, G protein -coupled receptor; IL, interleukin; LTB 4 R, LTB 4 receptor; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; TNF , tumour necrosis factor.

<!-- image -->

and mitochondrial activity 27 . There is also evidence that the presence of ATP can enhance the migration of neutrophils towards N -formyl peptides or CXC-chemokine ligand 8 (CXCL8) by activating RHOA 28,29 .

Early neutrophil chemotaxis and activation is also triggered by N -formyl peptides, such as fMet-Leu-Phe (fMLP). Although these peptides can be derived from bacterial proteins, they are also released from mitochondria after tissue damage and activate human neutrophils by binding to the GPCRs fMLP receptor 1 (FPR1), FPR2 and FPR3 (REFS 30-32) . In vitro , FPR1-specific antibodies block neutrophil migration to disrupted mitochondrial products 31 or necrotic cells 33 . FPR1 blockade or deficiency also prevents the guidance of recruited

neutrophils to necrotic cells in a localized hepatic injury in mice 33 , which highlights the importance of this signal as a short-range cue for proper neutrophil localization to a site of injury.

Other early signals produced by tissue and tissueresident cells. The initial signals can be short-lived; studies in zebrafish suggest that the peak of H O  pro2 2 duction is around 30 minutes after injury and the signal is completely cleared 1 hour later by the myeloperoxidase activity of wound-associated neutrophils 34 . For more sustained neutrophil recruitment, long-term and long-range signals are activated, mainly comprising chemokines and lipid mediators.

## Box 2 | Neutrophil signalling in motility

There is an extensive literature on the downstream signalling mechanisms that regulate neutrophil directed migration to specific chemokines and other signals 6,11,161-164 , and only general principles are discussed in this Review. Directed migration is mediated by chemoattractant signalling through G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and other receptors that induce the asymmetric localization and activation of key signalling molecules, including phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), phospholipase C (PLC) and members of the RHO GTPase family, such as RAC 165  (see the figure). The asymmetric distribution of the PI3K product phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P ) 3 at the front of polarized neutrophils is a hallmark of gradient sensing induced by chemoattractants 165-167 . The localized recruitment of PtdIns(3,4,5)P mediates the 3 recruitment of specific adaptor proteins and guanine nucleotide-exchange factors, such as dedicator of cytokinesis protein 2 (DOCK2) and PtdIns(3,4,5)P -dependent RAC exchanger 3 protein 1 (PREX1), respectively, that lead to the activation of RAC signalling and polarized actin polymerization during directed migration 168,169 . Although many attractant cues signal through PI3K and RAC, there is evidence that signalling hierarchies exist in which some chemoattractants are more dependent on p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase or PI3K signalling in vitro 170 . Specificity can be provided by the interaction of chemokine receptors with different ligands or the binding of receptors to specific downstream binding partners as has been described with the binding of CXC-chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2) to vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) 38 . In addition, different GPCR kinases have been reported to bind to CXCR1 and CXCR2, providing specificity in the regulation of receptor internalization and therefore an additional layer of regulation 171 .

Less is known about the key signals that mediate neutrophil migration in vivo . Zebrafish are an important tool for the analysis of signalling in vivo , and recent studies have showed that both RAC signalling 172  and calcium flux 173 at the leading edge are sufficient to guide cell movement in live animals. However, despite recent progress, a challenge for future investigation remains in determining how neutrophils prioritize competing cues in vivo through the modulation of specific downstream intracellular signalling pathways that mediate responses to tissue damage.

CALDAG-GEF1, Ca 2+ and diacyglycerol-regulated guanine nucleotide exchange factor 1; CXCL8, CXC-chemokine ligand 8; Fc γ R, Fc γ receptor; fMLP , fMet-Leu-Phe; ICAM1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1; InsP , inositol trisphosphate; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; LTB 3 4 , leukotriene B 4 ; RAP1, repressor/activator protein 1 homologue; SFKs, SRC family kinases; TLRs, Toll-like receptors. Nature Reviews   Immunology |

<!-- image -->

The CXCL8 family comprises some of the main chemokines that are involved in neutrophil migration, including CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, CXCL5, CXCL6, CXCL7 and CXCL8. These chemokines are sensed by neutrophils through the GPCRs CXC-chemokine receptor 1 (CXCR1) and CXCR2 (REFS 35,36) and activate downstream signalling to vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP), PI3K and SFKs to mediate neutrophil directed migration 37,38 (BOX 2) . These chemokines can be produced by both immune cells (including neutrophils, macrophages and T cells) and non-leukocytes (including epithelial and endothelial cells) in response to both injury and infection. Human CXCL8 has been known to be a neutrophil chemoattractant for more than 25 years 39 , and the role of CXCL8 family-CXCR signalling in neutrophil migration has been confirmed in vivo in both mice and zebrafish 40-44 . To attract more distant neutrophils, CXCL8 family chemokines, among other chemokines, can bind to glycosaminoglycans on cell walls and in the extracellular matrix to create chemokine gradients along the tissues and structures through which neutrophils migrate 33,42,45 . When HEK293T cells expressing fluorescently tagged CXCL8 were transplanted into zebrafish larvae, the CXCL8 accumulated locally around the transplanted cells but then spread outwards into the vasculature, forming immobilized gradients 42 . Such intravascular extracellular matrix-bound chemokine gradients have also been observed in mouse models of acute hepatic injury, reaching as far away as 650 μm 33 , and when CXCL8 was injected intradermally into rabbits or added to human skin ex vivo it appeared to be bound to the lumen of venular endothelial cells 46 .

Lipid mediators are also strong inducers of neutro  phil chemotaxis. These mediators are derived from arachidonic acid. After arachidonic acid release by activated cytosolic phospholipase A  (cPLA ), arachidonic acid is 2 2 metabolized through multiple enzymatic pathways into a wide range of molecules, each with specific functions. The lipid mediator that is known to have the largest effect on neutrophil migration is leukotriene B  (LTB ), which 4 4 is produced from arachidonic acid by 5-lipoxygenase and sensed by the GPCR BLT  receptor (also known as 1 LTB4 R) to induce neutrophil polarization and migration (BOX 2) . Although some LTB  is produced fairly early after 4 wounding to recruit neutrophils, it also functions in the amplification stage of neutrophil recruitment and is discussed in detail in the next section. Other lipid mediators can also induce neutrophil chemotaxis, including 5-oxo-eicosatetraenoic acid (5-KETE) 47 .

In most cases, the production of these chemo  kines and lipid mediators is activated by DAMPs that are released after cell damage. Pre-made stores of chemo  kines can be rapidly released via exocytosis from endothelial cells that are activated by DAMPs 48,49 . DAMPs also activate core enzymatic and transcriptional pathways, such as nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and activator protein 1 (AP-1), which result in the production of chemokines and lipid mediators. Recently, in two different mouse models, DAMPmediated activation of the NLRP3 (NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-  containing 3) inflammasome by ATP was linked to persistent neutrophil recruitment 33,50 .

## REVI E W S

Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). Molecules that are derived from pathogens such as bacteria, fungi or viruses. They readily diffuse through tissues and can be protein-derived or non-protein-derived.

Tissue injury also results in the release of intracellular ion stores, creating alterations in neighbouring cell osmolarity. In vivo in zebrafish larvae, cells surrounding tissue wounds can sense changes in osmolarity through the activation of cPLA  and the release of arachidonic 2 acid, which is metabolized into 5-KETE 51 . Knockdown of expression of cPLA  or oxo  eicosanoid receptor 1 2 (OXER1; the GPCR for 5-KETE) inhibited leukocyte recruitment to a wound by decreasing both neutrophil velocity and directionality 51 .

Amplification of neutrophil recruitment. Neutrophil recruitment is exponentially amplified in a phase sometimes termed 'neutrophil swarming' . To promote this phase, more signals must arise from the early-recruited cells - including neutrophils and macrophages - to recruit more neutrophils both directly and indirectly through the further activation of tissue and tissueresident cells 8,52 . This is the next step in the cascade of signals that promotes neutrophil forward migration and involves many of the same signals that are involved in earlier phases, including LTB  and CXCL8 family 4 chemokines 7,52 .

LTB4 can amplify neutrophil responses to primary chemoattractants in several ways. In vitro , in response to fMLP, human neutrophils generate local microgradients of LTB  at their leading edge, functioning as an autocrine 4 signal and stabilizing neutrophil polarization 53 . Longer range gradients of LTB  are also created to recruit new 4 neutrophils 53 . In a mouse model of laser-induced dermal tissue injury, LTB R-  deficient neutrophils close to a 4 wound were able to undergo chemotaxis to the wound, but more distant neutrophils required LTB R to be effi4 ciently recruited, which suggests that LTB  is specifically 4 required for persistent and long-term neutrophil infiltration 54 . This defect in recruitment is similar to that observed when all GPCR-Gα  signalling is inhibited i2 54 , providing evidence that LTB  is a major signal in this 4 phase. In addition to the requirement for sensing LTB 4 through its receptor, neutrophils are also a source of LTB4 and neutrophils that genetically lacked 5-lipoxygenase also could not swarm to the wound 54 . LTB  pro4 duction is also important for neutrophil recruitment in mouse models of   inflammatory arthritis 55,56 .

Furthermore, the amplification step is likely to be initiated through the recognition of DAMPs by the early-  recruited cells. In addition to functioning as direct neutrophil chemoattractants, N -formyl peptides activate ERK1, ERK2 and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling pathways 57 and stimulate LTB  production by 4 neutrophils 53 . Cyclic ADP ribose (cADPR; a metabolite of NAD ) has also been shown to have a role in this + amplification stage in a mouse model of laser-  induced dermal tissue injury . Treatment of neutrophils with a 7 competitive inhibitor of cADPR signalling did not affect early neutrophil recruitment but prevented the amplification phase of the neutrophil response . In a mouse 7 model, neutrophil swarming correlated with cell death of some of the initially recruited cells and this probably produces more DAMPs 54 . The exact signals that these dying cells release to induce swarming is unclear because

neutrophils deficient in single GPCRs including Fpr1 , Fpr2 , Cxcr2 and P2rx7 could migrate short distances normally when injected into the damaged tissue in this model 54 , and it is likely that a   combination of   signals is released.

Other secondary signals are also produced by these early-recruited neutrophils. In a model of inflammatory arthritis, LTB -activated neutrophils produce chemo4 kines, such as CXCL2, and the cytokine interleukin-1β (IL-1β), which activates tissue endothelial cells, fibroblast-like cells and macrophages to produce more ligands for CXCR1, CXCR2 and CC-chemokine receptor 1 (CCR1), further amplifying neutrophil recruitment 58 . Activated neutrophils also express matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which can cleave CXCL8 family chemokines to increase their chemotactic effect 59,60 . Collagen in the extracellular matrix can also be cleaved by neutrophil MMP activity to create collagen-derived chemotactic peptides 61 .

In addition to early-recruited neutrophils, recruited monocytes and macrophages amplify the neutrophil response. Pro-inflammatory monocytes and macrophages can be recruited by initial DAMP signals but neutro  phils also recruit these cells through the production of macrophage chemokines and through further activation of surrounding non-immune tissue cells,   setting off a feed-forward loop of neutrophil recruitment 62 .

Additional levels of signalling in infection. The tight control of neutrophil recruitment after infection is arguably even more important than after tissue injury. Although inflammation must be maintained until the infection is cleared, neutrophils can also provide niches within which pathogens can replicate 63 .  Neutrophil swarms have been observed after infection with several types of pathogen, including bacteria 64 and protozoa 65 . Neutrophil infiltration in response to early-recruited neutrophil cell death 54 is likely to be even more pronounced in infections, as many pathogens can cause necrosis of host cells 66 . Neutrophil recruitment can also be altered by pathogens that carry virulence factors that directly interfere with or promote neutrophil recruitment 67-69 . Probably one of the most important differences in infections is the presence of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) in addition to tissue DAMPs, which creates an extra level of danger signals (reviewed in REF. 70 ). Another major variable in infection is the duration of the damage, especially if the pathogen is not cleared. These factors lead to a much wider range of immune cells participating in and modulating neutrophil recruitment, including macrophages 68,71 , dendritic cells 72 , mast cells 73 and T cells 74 .

As in a sterile tissue injury, tissue and tissue-resident cells can sense the presence of infection-induced damage and can transmit signals to neutrophils through the production of chemokines. Perivascular macrophages produce CXCL1 and CXCL2 to promote neutrophil extravasation at sites of bacterial infection in mouse ear skin 68 ,  whereas dendritic cells produce CXCL1 and CXCL2 after an infection with Leishmania spp. 72 . Mast cells can indirectly recruit neutrophils to a site of

infection through the production of tumour necrosis factor (TNF) 75 or a tryptase 76 , both of which promote chemokine production from tissue cells. Mast cells also directly recruit neutrophils through the production of eukotrienes such as LTB  and LTC l 4 4 (REF. 77) .

The same amplification of neutrophil recruitment through feed-forward signalling and macrophageneutrophil-tissue cell crosstalk is also observed after infection. In a mouse model of uropathogenic Escherichia coli infection, tissue-resident macrophages (denoted lymphocyte antigen 6C (LY6C) low ) first sense the infection and produce a variety of chemokines, of which CXCL1 is the most important, to recruit both neutrophils and nonresident inflammatory macrophages (denoted LY6C hi ) 71 . These inflammatory macrophages then produce TNF to further activate the tissue-resident macrophages to release pre-formed stores of CXCL2 that further recruit neutrophils to the infection site 71 . In Staphylococcus aureus infection, early-recruited immune cells phagocytose the bacteria, leading to inflammasome activation by the bacterial cell wall component peptidoglycan and to IL-1β secretion 78,79 . IL-1β then activates non-immune tissue cells to produce more   pro-inflammatory cytokines and neutrophil chemokines 80 .

The adaptive immune system has a key role in the persistent neutrophil inflammation that can be induced by infection. In several models, T cells and T cellproduced cytokines are important for neutrophil recruitment to infection, including Streptococcus pneumonia 81 and Helicobacter pylori 82 infections. Many factors contribute to the crosstalk between T cells and neutrophils in the context of infection 83 , but the involvement of the cytokine IL-17 seems to be particularly important 84,85 . In a cutaneous model of S. aureus infection, resistance to infection depends on the presence of neutrophils 86 , and both αβ T cells and IL-17-producing T cells have been shown to be important for the neutrophil response 74 . IL-17 stimulates both tissue cells and leukocytes to produce a range of cytokines, including CXCL8 family chemokines and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), which promotes the production and the maturation of neutrophils from the bone marrow 87,88 . After infection with S.  aureus ,  mice with lowered IL-17 levels as a result of γδ T cell deficiency had lowered levels of CXCL1 and CXCL2 production and consequently impaired neutrophil recruitment 89 . In this case, decreased neutrophil recruitment resulted in poor infection outcome, which could be rescued by   administration of recombinant IL-17 (REF. 89) .

Distinguishing an infection from a wound. It is crucial for the host to distinguish whether a tissue injury has an associated infection, as this determines both the strength and the length of the appropriate response. Responses to infection, such as an S. aureus skin infection, can create especially large neutrophil swarms 90 . Exactly how the host integrates information on the persistence of damage and the diversity of signals after wounding or infection into differing responses is not clear. This question is relevant for the development of anti-inflammatory therapies that prevent chronic inflammation but that

## REVI E W S

retain a sufficient response to infection. Although many DAMPs and PAMPs signal through similar receptors and converge on similar signalling pathways, there is evidence that cells can interpret and respond to these signals differently 91 .

A few studies have directly compared the requirements for neutrophil recruitment to a wound versus an infection. In zebrafish larvae, H O  was found to be 2 2 required for the early neutrophil response to a wound but not to Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Streptococcus iniae infections 92 . Moreover, IL-1β and myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88 (MYD88)-mediated signalling were required for neutrophil responses to a wound but not to E. coli infection 93 . There is also evidence that neutrophils migrate differently to host-produced versus pathogen-produced signals. In vitro , human neutrophils retrotaxed after responding to a gradient of LTB , 4 whereas the neutrophils were 'trapped' after they arrived at a source of the fungal cell wall component zymosan 94 .

One mechanism for the distinction between a wound and an infection involves CD24 and its ability to specifically trap DAMPs (including HMGB1, heat shock protein 70 kDa (HSP70) and HSP90) and prevent their binding to receptors 95,96 . CD24 interacts with Siglec-G, which associates with SH2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 1 (SHP1; also known as PTPN6), a negative regulator of NF-κB activation 97 . In this manner, CD24 decreases NF-κB-mediated activation of tissue-resident cells such as dendritic cells and thereby reduces the amplification stage of neutrophil recruitment 97 .

It has been proposed that neutrophils have phenotypic heterogeneity and functional plasticity (BOX 3) ; several markers of different neutrophil phenotypes have been identified, although disease associations and functional characteristics of these phenotypes need to be established 98 . Differing signals at a wound or infection probably define the phenotype of the responding neutrophils (either by altering their phenotype after they arrive at the site or by specifically recruiting certain subsets that pre-exist in the circulation). A future challenge will be to determine the distinct neutrophil subsets that exist in different types of damage, including 'sterile' versus infected tissue, and to probe the complex signalling networks that integrate diverse inputs into a specific response.

## Reverse migration of neutrophils

In a successful response to an acute injury, it is crucial to prevent tissue damage by promoting the local resolution of inflammation through the removal of neutrophils from the site of injury 62 . This clearance of neutrophils can occur through apoptosis or necrosis and subsequent phagocytosis by macrophages 99 . However, some early evidence suggested that neutrophils at inflamed sites do not necessarily undergo apoptosis. Hughes and colleagues used a rat model of glomerular capillary injury to track the fate of radiolabelled neutrophils and found that ≥70% of neutrophils that entered inflamed glomerular capillaries were able to return to the main circulation and did not undergo apoptosis at the site of

## Reverse transendothelial migration

(rTEM). The movement of neutrophils back into the vasculature after being in tissues.

## Fugetaxis

Also known as retrotaxis. The movement of cells away from a source of chemoattractant in vitro .

## Box 3 | Neutrophil heterogeneity and plasticity

During the past decade, evidence has been accumulating for the existence of neutrophil subsets with phenotypic heterogeneity and functional plasticity in different models 106,174,175 . Perhaps the best characterized example is in the tumour microenvironment, in which neutrophils develop polarity that is similar to the M1 and M2 polarization described for macrophages. Tumour-associated neutrophils can be designated as N1 (anti-tumorigenic and pro-inflammatory) and N2 (pro-tumorigenic and immunosuppressive) 176 . Tumour-associated N2 neutrophils are characterized by high expression of CXC-chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4), vascular endothelial growth factor and matrix metalloproteinase 9 and are induced in the presence of high levels of transforming growth factorβ (TGF β ). By contrast, N1 neutrophils express pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, can kill cancer cells and are induced by inhibition of TGF β signalling. Analogous neutrophil subsets may exist in damaged or infected tissues, although these phenotypes have not been well characterized. Subsets of neutrophils have also been defined by surface receptor expression and density (low-density neutrophils versus high- or normal-density neutrophils). For example, CXCR4 expression is increased in aged or senescent neutrophils 177 and is associated with neutrophil trafficking to the bone marrow. Other changes in the expression of surface proteins on neutrophils have been described, including CD63 expression in the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis 178 , intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) expression associated with systemic inflammation and reverse migration 120 or CD177 expression associated with autoimmune diseases 174,179 . Low-density neutrophils have been associated mostly with autoimmune disorders 180 , sepsis 181 , HIV infection 182,183 and cancer 176 . In addition to heterogeneity, neutrophil phenotypes can be plastic. For example, neutrophils under specific inflammatory settings have been reported to differentiate into other myeloid cell types 83 , including dendritic cells (DCs), and purified bone marrow-derived neutrophils can differentiate into a hybrid population characterized by the expression of DC and neutrophil markers after in vitro treatment with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, tumour necrosis factor and interleukin-4, and this has been verified both in vitro and in vivo 184 . It is likely that the environment (pro- or anti-inflammatory as well as the tissue or organ microenvironment) helps to control neutrophil differentiation and modulate the specialization and function of these cells.

inflammation 100 . More recent studies have showed that neutrophils can leave sites of tissue damage in a process termed neutrophil reverse migration, which describes the interstitial migration of neutrophils away from inflamed sites. Neutrophils have also been reported to re-enter the vasculature in a distinct process referred to as neutrophil reverse transendothelial migration (rTEM).

Neutrophil reverse migration within tissues away from the site of injury was first directly visualized in vivo in zebrafish larvae, in which it was shown that not all recruited neutrophils die at the site of injury, and most leave the site 101 . In subsequent studies using zebrafish, it was shown that neutrophils that leave a wound can undergo rTEM and traffic to distal sites post injury 102,103 . Moreover, Buckley and colleagues 104 described the ability of human neutrophils to reverse transmigrate through an endothelial monolayer in vitro , identifying markers that are characteristic of these reverse-  transmigrated neutrophils  (intercellular  adhesion  molecule  1 (ICAM1) hi CXCR1 low ), and found this neutrophil phenotype in the peripheral blood of patients with systemic inflammation. Since these early studies, neutrophil reverse migration and/or rTEM have been visualized in multiple models including zebrafish 105-108 , mice 109,110 and in vitro using human neutrophils 94,111 (FIG. 2) . In vitro studies using microfluidics showed that more than 90% of human neutrophils can reverse their direction away from a chemoattractant and migrate away continually for distances greater than 1,000 μm 111 . Together, these studies have suggested that reverse migration is a possible mechanism to locally resolve inflammation and is a potential novel target for drug therapy in diseases charac  terized by excessive neutrophil infiltration. However, a caveat is that neutrophil reverse migration may lead to activated neutrophils being redistributed to other locations in the body, contributing to

inflammation elsewhere. It is also important to note that many aspects of neutrophil reverse migration remain controversial including the exact mechanism(s), the fate of reverse-migrated neutrophils and the occurrence of reverse migration in human disease.

Potential mechanisms of reverse migration. The cues that mediate neutrophil reverse migration from sites of tissue damage remain mostly unknown. Reverse migration can be confused with the terms fugetaxis or retrotaxis 112 , mechanisms that may have only a partial role in neutrophil reverse migration in vivo . Several mech  anisms have been proposed to explain the reverse migration of neutrophils from inflamed tissues, including a competition between chemoattractant sources at the wound and the vasculature. A neutrophil may prioritize competing cues through the downregulation of specific chemokine receptors and/or receptor desensitization. It has also been postulated that new chemo  repellent cues may be released at the wound to mediate neutrophil reverse movement. Finally, other factors may influence the potential to leave damaged tissues, including decreased levels of wound chemoattractants and/or neutrophil-  intrinsic transcriptional changes 113 . Neutrophils constantly sense a variety of stimuli and must process and prioritize all of these inputs to determine their behaviour and it is likely that a process as complex as reverse migration occurs through a ombination of these mechanisms. c

Few studies have shown a direct link between neutrophil reverse migration and specific pathways (FIG. 2) . However, one pathway that has been specifically implicated in neutrophil migration out of wounded tissue in larval zebrafish is the hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) pathway 105 . In addition to reducing neutrophil apoptosis, HIF1α activation in zebrafish neutrophils

## A In vitro human cell culture

- a Chemoattractants function as chemorepellents at high concentrations

Figure 2 | Mechanisms that may be involved in neutrophil reverse migration. Several models for reverse migration have been developed: in vitro microfluidic assays or transwell assays (part A ), larval zebrafish wounding (part Bs   Immunology ) and mouse ischaemia-reperfusion injury to model reverse transendothelial migration (rTEM; part C ). These studies have reported mechanisms that regulate both neutrophil reverse migration in interstitial tissues and rTEM. A | Chemoattractants, such as CXC-chemokine ligand 8 (CXCL8), can function as chemorepellents at high concentrations in vitro , referred to as fugetaxis (part a ). Reverse neutrophil transmigration through endothelial cell monolayers has been reported; reverse -transmigrated neutrophils are characterized by high expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) and low expression of CXC-chemokine receptor 1 (CXCR1) (part b ). In vitro analysis in microfluidics has identified factors that regulate neutrophil forward and reverse migration (part c ). The pro-resolving lipid mediator lipoxin A  (LXA ) induces neutrophil reverse 4 4 migration whereas zymosan induces neutrophil trapping. B | The reverse migration and rTEM of neutrophils has been visualized in larval zebrafish tail wounds using photoconversion (part a ). The activation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 α (HIF1 α ) in zebrafish neutrophils inhibits neutrophil reverse migration (part b ), whereas the migration of macrophages to the wound via reactive oxygen species (ROS)-SRC family kinase (SFK) signalling and their direct interaction with neutrophils promotes neutrophil reverse migration (part c ). C | A mouse ischaemia-reperfusion injury model is used to model neutrophil rTEM or 'hesitant' TEM. In this model, junctional adhesion molecule C (JAMC) on endothelial cells modulates 'complete' TEM and leukotriene B  (LTB ) induces neutrophil elastase expression, which cleaves JAMC, leading to an increase in rTEM 4 4 119 (part a ). Increased rTEM in this model leads to higher numbers of neutrophils with rTEM markers (ICAM1 CXCR1 low hi ) at secondary sites such as the lungs (part b ) . fMLP , fMet-Leu-Phe; LTB 4 R, LTB  receptor . 4 Nature Review |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- b Reverse transmigration through endothelial cell layers

<!-- image -->

- c Reverse migration in microfluidic chambers depends on which signals a neutrophil encounters

<!-- image -->

## REVIEWS

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## REVI E W S

increases the retention of neutrophils at the site of tissue injury 105 . It is known that in vitro chemoattractants such as CXCL8 can function as chemorepellents in higher concentrations 114 and therefore neutrophil behaviour might change as the cell migrates up a chemokine gradient. Data indicating that reverse-migrated human neutro  phils have lowered cell surface expression of CXCR1 (REF. 104) provides some evidence for the idea that neutrophils might stop responding to chemoattractants at the wound because of receptor internalization or downregulation. Other tissue-resident cells are also implicated in the control of neutrophil reverse migration. In zebrafish, direct contact of neutrophils with macrophages at a wound induces neutrophils to migrate away and autocrine redox-SFK signalling in macrophages is required for the resolution of neutrophil inflammation 108 . This is an especially intriguing observation in the context of patients with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) and deficient ROS signalling who develop chronic neutrophil   inflammation in tissues 115 .

The relative levels of different lipid mediators can also promote the resolution of inflammation and may be involved in neutrophil reverse migration. As discussed, LTB4 is a neutrophil chemoattractant but, after lipidmediator class switching, pro-inflammatory lipid mediator production pathways are altered to instead produce pro-resolution mediators such as lipoxin A  (LXA ) 4 4 116,117 . Other pro-resolution lipid mediators include resolvins and protectins and stop the influx of new neutrophils 118 . They are also implicated in promoting the resolution of existing neutrophil inflammation: LXA  can enhance 4 the reverse migration of human neutrophils in vitro in a microfluidic device 111 .

In addition to reverse migrating through tissue away from an injury, neutrophils may also re-enter the circulation through rTEM. Neutrophils that were recruited to a tissue wound could be observed back in the circulation in zebrafish 102,103 . In mice, in which there are greater challenges to imaging than in zebrafish, the Nourshargh laboratory has used 'disturbed' neutrophil TEM after ischaemia-reperfusion injury as a model for rTEM 110,119 . In this model, junctional adhesion molecule C (JAMC) at endothelial cell junctions modulates 'complete' TEM and a decrease in the levels of JAMC expression after injury increases the occurrence of rTEM 110 . Moreover, LTB  stimulates the production of 4 neutrophil elastase, which cleaves JAMC and therefore increases rates of rTEM 119 . This suggests that LTB  may 4 be involved in both forward and reverse transmigration to damaged tissue.

What determines whether neutrophils reverse migrate or die at the site of damage? Different neutrophil subsets might be predisposed to reverse migrate from the time they leave the circulation or because of transcriptional changes induced at the injury site 98,120 (BOX 3) . In vitro , neutrophils that encounter the fungal cell wall component zymosan have decreased reverse migration 94,111 , and it is tempting to speculate that neutrophils are less likely to reverse migrate away from sites of infection, at least partly to prevent the dissemination of   intracellular pathogens.

It has been proposed that neutrophils do not actively undergo directed reverse migration, but they are simply randomly redistributed away from the wound. By simulating neutrophil behaviour with different mathematical models on the basis of neutrophil migration measurements made in zebrafish, several studies suggested that the migration of neutrophils away from a wound could be best described by a diffusion process rather than by a fuge  taxis process 107,121,122 . Therefore reverse migration of neutrophils might be a result of a loss of sensitivity towards recruitment and/or retention signals rather than active repulsion induced by the release of a chemorepellent from the wound or by active attraction as a result of chemoattractants in the blood or vascular endothelial cells. Overall, the mechanisms controlling reverse migration are still not clear. It is likely that multiple processes contribute to the migration of neutrophils away from a site of inflammation and back into the   circulation, possibly combined in a reverse migration cascade.

What is the phenotype and fate of reverse-migrated neutrophils? Do reverse-migrated neutrophils have a different phenotype compared with 'naive' neutrophils? Neutrophils in peripheral tissues are known to be more active transcriptionally and translationally than their counterparts in the circulation 123 . Neutrophils that have undergone rTEM in vitro were found to express specific markers, ICAM1 hi  and CXCR1 low (REFS 104,110) , and these markers have been used to identify neutrophils that had presumably undergone rTEM in peripheral human blood 104 and in secondary sites of inflammation in mice 110 . In addition, human neutrophils that have undergone rTEM in vitro are less susceptible to apoptosis and produce more ROS 104 , and mouse neutrophils expressing rTEM markers in vivo also produce higher levels of ROS 110 . By contrast, although zebrafish reverse-migrated neutrophils (not necessarily neutrophils that underwent rTEM) were found to have an activated morphology, they did not have altered ROS production or response to a secondary insult, whether a tissue wound or an infection 106 . There is no clear evidence, therefore, that all reversemigrated neutrophils show a pro- or anti-inflammatory phenotype. These neutrophils may in fact have varying fates or phenotypes according to where and how they are recruited out of the blood into tissues in the first place and what they encounter at the injury site.

Where do neutrophils go after reverse migrating out of the tissue? Zebrafish neutrophils can be found in tissues or in the circulation for at least 2 days after leaving a wound 102 . The fate of these neutrophils is important for patients, as systemic inflammation after severe trauma can lead to multiple organ failure 124 . Recently, human patients with acute pancreatitis that developed acute lung injury were found to have a higher level of neutrophils carrying rTEM markers in their circulation 125 . In a mouse model of acute pancreatitis, increasing the level of neutrophils expressing rTEM markers in the circulation and pulmonary vasculature through genetic deletion of JAMC increased the severity of lung injury and systemic inflammation 125 . Similarly, after ischaemia-reperfusion injury in mice, neutrophils with rTEM markers were

found to be relocalized in the lungs 110 . Furthermore, experimentally increasing the rates of rTEM resulted in increased neutrophil relocalization and organ damage in the lungs, liver and heart 119 .

Neutrophils have also been shown to leave inflamed or infected sites, travel through the lymphatics and relocal  ize to the lymph nodes 126-128 or bone marrow 109 to affect host defence. These neutrophils can shuttle live pathogens to lymph nodes 127 and modulate lymphocyte proliferation 109,126 . Neutrophil migration from inflamed skin to lymph nodes depends on CD11b and CXCR4, and CD11b deficiency in neutrophils decreases T cell proliferation in draining lymph nodes 126 . The transport of antigen from intradermally injected modified vaccinia Ankara virus to the bone marrow by neutrophils can also initiate the expansion of viral-targeting memory CD8 + T cells 109 . Much more work needs to be done to further clarify the phenotype and the fate of reverse-migrated neutrophils and the implications for human disease.

## Neutrophil migration: a drug target

The failure to appropriately resolve inflammation can have disastrous effects. Excessive and persistent infiltration of neutrophils into tissues has a role in several inflammatory diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis 129 , pulmonary fibrosis 130 and multiple organ failure 124 ; neutrophil behaviour is therefore a potential target for drug therapies. One concern regarding anti-inflammatory therapies is achieving the resolution of inflammation at a specific site without causing systemic immunosuppression. Another major goal is the identification of molecular targets that distinguish infection from wound-induced inflammation so as to not impair the ability of the body to fight invading pathogens. Drugs that induce neutrophil apoptosis or necrosis at an injury site would reduce neutrophil numbers, but the clearance of dead cells might increase overall local inflammation. Therefore, both neutrophil forward and reverse migration are attractive targets for anti-inflammatory therapies. We discuss exciting new targets in these pathways below and highlight drugs that are in the clinical trial pipeline in TABLE 1 .

## REVI E W S

Targeting forward migration. To inhibit neutrophil migration to a site of damage, the neutrophil motility machinery, primary signals that recruit neutrophils or the amplification stage of inflammation could be targeted. Colchicine, a microtubule inhibitor, is a known inhibitor of neutrophil chemotaxis and impairs neutrophil recruitment to sites of inflammation in vivo . It is used to treat human conditions including gout, chronic pericarditis and familial Mediterranean fever 131 . To target neutrophil recruitment signals, the early phase of signalling may be more promising as the amplification phase involves the activation of multiple complex pathways. Conversely, inhibiting specific pathways in the amplification phase could fine-tune the neutrophil response without completely eliminating it. Several clinical trials are currently assessing the effect of CXCR1 and CXCR2 antagonists and inhibitors (TABLE 1) on inflammatory conditions ranging from cancer to autoimmune diseases (ClinicalTrials.gov), and some have reported promising results 132,133 . However, chemokine receptor antagonist therapy has failed in the past because of differences between animal models and human patients and redundancy of the targets 134 . Other clinical trials are targeting lipid mediator-  induced inflammation with LTB R antagonists. Resolvins 4 are an exciting class of molecules as they can inhibit neutro  phil transmigration in vitro 135 , and two different resolvin molecules, including chemically synthesized molecules, can significantly decrease the number of neutrophils at a site of damage at least partially through decreased levels of neutrophil chemokines including CXCL1 and LTB 4 (REFS 135,136) .

Targeting reverse migration. An alternative approach to decrease chronic inflammation is to promote neutrophil reverse migration from local sites of damage. Resolvins and protectins may also resolve inflammation by promoting the removal of leukocytes from injured tissue sites 137 . A drug screen in zebrafish revealed a novel drug known as tanshinone IIA, which is derived from a Chinese medicinal herb and seems to accelerate apoptosis of neutrophils and promote their reverse

Table 1 | Drugs in current clinical trials that specifically target neutrophil migration signals*

| Drug name   | Target          | Disease or model                                                                                    | Stage        | Refs     |
|-------------|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|----------|
| SCH 527123  | CXCR2           | Severe asthma, allergen-induced asthma, COPD, psoriasis  and colon cancer                           | Phase I-II   | 185      |
| Reparixin   | CXCR1 and CXCR2 | Ischaemia-reperfusion injury, lung, pancreatic islet and  kidney transplantation, and breast cancer | Phase II-III | 186      |
| DF 2156A    | CXCR1 and CXCR2 | Active bullous pemphigoid                                                                           | Phase II     | 187      |
| AZD-8309    | CXCR1 and CXCR2 | LPS-induced airway inflammation                                                                     | Phase I      | 188      |
| SB-656933   | CXCR2           | Ulcerative colitis, cystic fibrosis and ozone-induced  airway inflammation                          | Phase I-II   | 132      |
| GSK1325756  | CXCR2           | Influenza virus infection and healthy volunteers                                                    | Phase II     | 189      |
| AZD5069     | CXCR2           | Healthy volunteers and LPS-induced airway inflammation                                              | Phase I      | 190 ,191 |
| QBM076      | Not known       | COPD                                                                                                | Phase II     | 192, 193 |

COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CXCR, CXC-chemokine receptor; LPS, lipopolysaccharide. *More details at ClinicalTrials.gov.

## REVI E W S

migration 107 . However, targeting this mechanism raises several concerns, including the fate and activation state of reverse-migrated neutrophils. Disseminated neutrophils showing a strong pro-inflammatory or antiinflammatory phenotype could have deleterious effects such as promoting distal organ damage or systemic immunosuppression, respectively. A better characterization of reverse-migrated neutrophils in vivo is necessary before further advances in the development of therapies that target this mechanism.

## Future perspectives

Remarkable progress has been made in the past decade in understanding the mechanisms that regulate neutrophil migration, including the cells and the signals that attract neutrophils to sites of either tissue injury or infection. However, neutrophil reverse migration remains an understudied phenomenon and future work should focus on several key questions to drive the development of new therapies for neutrophil inflammatory disorders. First, the question of whether neutrophil reverse migration is 'good' or 'bad' for inflammation outcome is still mainly unanswered. Although excessive and prolonged neutrophil infiltration can lead to the development of chronic tissue inflammation, the migration of neutrophils back into the circulation might cause systemic inflammation and tissue damage at distal organs. It is likely that the answer to this question depends on the nature, the magnitude and the location of the inflammation. In the case of infection, premature neutrophil

- 1 . Kolaczkowska, E. &amp; Kubes, P. Neutrophil recruitment and function in health and inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13 , 159-175 (2013).
- 2 . Nathan, C. Neutrophils and immunity: challenges and opportunities. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6 , 173-182 (2006).
- 3 . Borregaard, N. Neutrophils, from marrow to microbes. Immunity 33 , 657-670 (2010).
- 4 . Caielli, S., Banchereau, J. &amp; Pascual, V. Neutrophils come of age in chronic inflammation. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 24 , 671-677 (2012).
- 5 . Ley, K. Integration of inflammatory signals by rolling neutrophils. Immunol. Rev. 186 , 8-18 (2002).
- 6 . Gambardella, L. &amp; Vermeren, S. Molecular players in neutrophil chemotaxis-focus on PI3K and small GTPases. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 94 , 603-612 (2013).
- 7 . Ng, L. G. et al. Visualizing the neutrophil response to sterile tissue injury in mouse dermis reveals a threephase cascade of events. J. Investigative Dermatol. 131 , 2058-2068 (2011).
- 8 . Lämmermann, T. In the eye of the neutrophil swarmnavigation signals that bring neutrophils together in inflamed and infected tissues. J. Leukoc  Biol. . pii: jlb.1MR0915-403 (2015).
- 9 . Nourshargh, S. &amp; Alon, R. Leukocyte migration into inflamed tissues. Immunity 41 , 694-707 (2014).
- 10 . Weninger, W., Biro, M. &amp; Jain, R. Leukocyte migration in the interstitial space of non-lymphoid organs. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14 , 232-246 (2014).
- 11 . Futosi, K., Fodor, S. &amp; Mócsai, A. Neutrophil cell surface receptors and their intracellular signal transduction pathways. Int. Immunopharmacol. 17 , 638-650 (2013).
- 12 . Sun, L. &amp; Ye, R. D. Role of G protein-coupled receptors in inflammation. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 33 , 342-350 (2012).
- 13 . Viola, A. &amp; Luster, A. D. Chemokines and their receptors: drug targets in immunity and inflammation. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 48 , 171-197 (2008).
- 14 . Pittman, K. &amp; Kubes, P. Damage-associated molecular patterns control neutrophil recruitment. J. Innate Immun. 5 , 315-323 (2013).

reverse migration could lead to failure to clear the infection and to dissemination of intracellular pathogens to other sites. In the case of tissue injury, reverse migration might have positive effects at the local site of inflammation, as the depletion of neutrophils can improve wound healing 138,139 , but may have negative effects systemically such as multiple organ failure. Another issue is the diversity of neutrophil pheno  types (BOX 3) . In cancer models, it has been proposed that, similarly to macrophages, neutrophil phenotypes can exist on a spectrum ranging from pro-inflammatory, anti-tumour 'N1' neutrophils to anti-inflammatory, pro-tumour 'N2' neutrophils. Does a similar plasticity exist at sites of tissue damage or infection? Does the phenotype of the neutrophil have any role in its ability to stay at the injury site or to reverse migrate away? In cases of chronic inflammation, is it possible to specifically promote the reverse migration of N1 neutro  phils and to leave pro-resolving N2 neutrophils at the wound? Or is it the reverse migration specifically of these N1 neutrophils that can cause systemic inflammation and distal organ damage? Does the outcome of an injury reprogramme reverse-migrating neutrophils to relay specific messages to different locations in the body? Although many unanswered questions remain, it is clear that neutrophil migration has a crucial role in inflammatory pathology. Fortunately, recent models and technologies have been developed that will enable the further elucidation of forward migration signals and the role of reverse migration in the pathophysiology of inflammatory diseases.

- 15 . Broggi, A. &amp; Granucci, F. Microbe- and dangerinduced inflammation. Mol. Immunol. 63 , 127-133 (2015).
- 16 . Vénéreau, E., Ceriotti, C. &amp; Bianchi, M. E. DAMPs from Cell Death to New Life. Frontiers Immunol. 6 , 422 (2015).
- 17 . Cordeiro, J. V. V. &amp; Jacinto, A. The role of transcription-independent damage signals in the initiation of epithelial wound healing. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 14 , 249-262 (2013).
- 18 . Niethammer, P., Grabher, C., Look, A. T . &amp; Mitchison, T . J. A tissue-scale gradient of hydrogen peroxide mediates rapid wound detection in zebrafish. Nature 459 , 996-999 (2009). This is the first paper to visualize H O  tissue 2 2 gradients in wound-induced inflammatory responses using zebrafish.
- 19 . Moreira, S., Stramer, B., Evans, I., Wood, W. &amp; Martin, P. Prioritization of competing damage and developmental signals by migrating macrophages in the Drosophila embryo. Curr. Biol. 20 , 464-470 (2010).
- 20 . Yoo, S. K., Starnes, T . W., Deng, Q. &amp; Huttenlocher, A. Lyn is a redox sensor that mediates leukocyte wound attraction in vivo. Nature 480 , 109-112 (2011).
- 21 . Klyubin, I. V., Kirpichnikova, K. M. &amp; Gamaley, I. A. Hydrogen peroxide-induced chemotaxis of mouse peritoneal neutrophils. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 70 , 347-351 (1996).
- 22 . Kovács, M. et al. The Src family kinases Hck, Fgr, and Lyn are critical for the generation of the in vivo inflammatory environment without a direct role in leukocyte recruitment. J. Exp. Med. 211 , 1993-2011 (2014).
- 23 . Baroja-Mazo, A., Barberà-Cremades, M. &amp; Pelegrín, P. The participation of plasma membrane hemichannels to purinergic signaling. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1828 , 79-93 (2013).
- 24 . de Oliveira, S. et al. ATP modulates acute inflammation in vivo through dual oxidase 1-derived H2O2 production and NFκ B activation. J. Immunol. 192 , 5710-5719 (2014).

- 25 . Elliott, M. R. et al. Nucleotides released by apoptotic cells act as a find-me signal to promote phagocytic clearance. Nature 461 , 282-286 (2009).
- 26 . Chen, Y. et al. ATP release guides neutrophil chemotaxis via P2Y2 and A3 receptors. Science 314 , 1792-1795 (2006).
- 27 . Bao, Y. et al. mTOR and differential activation of mitochondria orchestrate neutrophil chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 210 , 1153-1164 (2015).
- 28 . Kukulski, F. et al. Extracellular ATP and P2 receptors are required for IL-8 to induce neutrophil migration. Cytokine 46 , 166-170 (2009).
- 29 . Lecut, C. et al. P2X1 ion channels promote neutrophil chemotaxis through Rho kinase activation. J. Immunol. 183 , 2801-2809 (2009).
- 30 . Zhang, Q. et al. Circulating mitochondrial DAMPs cause inflammatory responses to injury. Nature 464 , 104-107 (2010).
- 31 . Raoof, M., Zhang, Q., Itagaki, K. &amp; Hauser, C. J. Mitochondrial peptides are potent immune activators that activate human neutrophils via FPR-1. J. T rauma 68 , 1328 (2010).
- 32 . Li, L. et al. New development in studies of formylpeptide receptors: critical roles in host defense. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 99 , 425-435 (2015).
- 33 . McDonald, B. et al. Intravascular danger signals guide neutrophils to sites of sterile inflammation. Science 330 , 362-366 (2010).
- 34 . Pase, L. et al. Neutrophil-delivered myeloperoxidase dampens the hydrogen peroxide burst after tissue wounding in zebrafish. Curr. Biol. 22 , 1818-1824 (2012).
- 35 . Russo, R. C., Garcia, C. C., T eixeira, M. M. &amp; Amaral, F. A. The CXCL8/IL-8 chemokine family and its receptors in inflammatory diseases. Expert Rev. Clin. Immunol. 10 , 593-619 (2014).
- 36 . Kobayashi, Y. The role of chemokines in neutrophil biology. Frontiers Biosci. 13 , 2400-2407 (2008).
- 37 . Sai, J., Raman, D., Liu, Y., Wikswo, J. &amp; Richmond, A. Parallel phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)dependent and Src-dependent pathways lead to CXCL8-mediated Rac2 activation and chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 283 , 26538-26547 (2008).
- 38 . Neel, N. F. et al. VASP is a CXCR2-interacting protein that regulates CXCR2-mediated polarization and chemotaxis. J. Cell Sci. 122 , 1882-1894 (2009).
- 39 . Lindley, I. et al. Synthesis and expression in Escherichia coli of the gene encoding monocytederived neutrophil-activating factor: biological equivalence between natural and recombinant neutrophil-activating factor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 85 , 9199-9203 (1988).
- 40 . de Oliveira, S. et al. Cxcl8 (IL-8) mediates neutrophil recruitment and behavior in the zebrafish inflammatory response. J. Immunol. 190 , 4349-4359 (2013).
- 41 . Deng, Q. et al. Localized bacterial infection induces systemic activation of neutrophils through Cxcr2 signaling in zebrafish. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 93 , 761-769 (2013).
- 42 . Sarris, M. et al. Inflammatory chemokines direct and restrict leukocyte migration within live tissues as glycan-bound gradients. Curr. Biol. 22 , 2375-2382 (2012).

This work identified glycan-bound CXCL8 gradients in vivo that mediate neutrophil directed migration to inflamed tissue in zebrafish.

- 43 . Cacalano, G. et al. Neutrophil and B cell expansion in mice that lack the murine IL-8 receptor homolog. Science 265 , 682-684 (1994).
- 44 . Devalaraja, R. M. et al. Delayed wound healing in CXCR2 knockout mice. J. Invest  Dermatol. . 115 , 234-244 (2000).
- 45 . Monneau, Y., Arenzana-Seisdedos, F. &amp; Lortat-Jacob, H. The sweet spot: how GAGs help chemokines guide migrating cells. J. Leukoc  Biol. . pii: jlb.3MR0915-440R (2015).
- 46 . Middleton, J. et al. T ranscytosis and surface presentation of IL-8 by venular endothelial cells. Cell 91 , 385-395 (1997).
- 47 . Powell, W. S., Gravel, S., MacLeod, R. J., Mills, E. &amp; Hashefi, M. Stimulation of human neutrophils by 5-oxo-6,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid by a mechanism independent of the leukotriene B4 receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 268 , 9280-9286 (1993).
- 48 . Øynebråten, I. et al. Characterization of a novel chemokine-containing storage granule in endothelial cells: evidence for preferential exocytosis mediated by protein kinase A and diacylglycerol. J. Immunol. 175 , 5358-5369 (2005).
- 49 . Hol, J., Wilhelmsen, L. &amp; Haraldsen, G. The murine IL-8 homologues KC, MIP-2, and LIX are found in endothelial cytoplasmic granules but not in WeibelPalade bodies. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 87 , 501-508 (2010).
- 50 . Iyer, S. S. et al. Necrotic cells trigger a sterile inflammatory response through the Nlrp3 inflammasome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106 , 20388-20393 (2009).
- 51 . Enyedi, B., Kala, S., Nikolich-Zugich, T . &amp; Niethammer, P. Tissue damage detection by osmotic surveillance. Nat. Cell Biol. 15 , 1123-1130 (2013).
- 52 . Sadik, C. D. &amp; Luster, A. D. Lipid-cytokine-chemokine cascades orchestrate leukocyte recruitment in inflammation. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 91 , 207-215 (2012).
- 53 . Afonso, P. V. et al. LTB4 is a signal-relay molecule during neutrophil chemotaxis. Dev. Cell 22 , 1079-1091 (2012).
- This study describes the role of autocrine LTB 4 gradients at the leading edge that guide neutrophil recruitment to sites of inflammation.
- 54 . Lämmermann, T. et al. Neutrophil swarms require LTB4 and integrins at sites of cell death in vivo. Nature 498 , 371-375 (2013). This work reports an initial molecular map of different factors that modulate neutrophil swarming behaviour in response to tissue damage in mice.
- 55 . Wipke, B. T . &amp; Allen, P . M. Essential role of neutrophils in the initiation and progression of a murine model of rheumatoid arthritis. J. Immunol. 167 , 1601-1608 (2001).
- 56 . Chen, M. et al. Neutrophil-derived leukotriene B4 is required for inflammatory arthritis. J. Exp. Med. 203 , 837-842 (2006).
- 57 . Hazeldine, J., Hampson, P., Opoku, F. A., Foster, M. &amp; Lord, J. M. N-Formyl peptides drive mitochondrial damage associated molecular pattern induced neutrophil activation through ERK1/2 and P38 MAP kinase signalling pathways. Injury 46 , 975-984 (2015).
- 58 . Chou, R. C. et al. Lipid-cytokine-chemokine cascade drives neutrophil recruitment in a murine model of inflammatory arthritis. Immunity 33 , 266-278 (2010).

- 59 . Van den Steen, P. E., Proost, P ., Wuyts, A., Van Damme, J. &amp; Opdenakker, G. Neutrophil gelatinase B potentiates interleukin-8 tenfold by amino-terminal processing, whereas it degrades CTAPIII, PF-4, and GROα and leaves RANTES and MCP-2 intact. Blood 96 , 2673-2681 (2000).
- 60 . Tester, A. M. et al. LPS responsiveness and neutrophil chemotaxis in vivo require PMN MMP-8 activity. PLoS ONE 2 , e312. (2007).
- 61 . Afonso, P. V., McCann, C. P ., Kapnick, S. M. &amp; Parent, C. A. Discoidin domain receptor 2 regulates neutrophil chemotaxis in 3D collagen matrices. Blood 121 , 1644-1650 (2013).
- 62 . Soehnlein, O. &amp; Lindbom, L. Phagocyte partnership during the onset and resolution of inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10 , 427-439 (2010).
- 63 . Peters, N. C. et al. In vivo imaging reveals an essential role for neutrophils in leishmaniasis transmitted by sand flies. Science 321 , 970-974 (2008).
- 64 . Kreisel, D. et al. In vivo two-photon imaging reveals monocyte-dependent neutrophil extravasation during pulmonary inflammation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107 , 18073-18078 (2010).
- 65 . Chtanova, T. et al. Dynamics of neutrophil migration in lymph nodes during infection. Immunity 29 , 487-496 (2008).
- 66 . Silva, M. T . Bacteria-induced phagocyte secondary necrosis as a pathogenicity mechanism. J. Leukoc . Biol. 88 , 885-896 (2010).
- 67 . Gonzalez, C. D., Ledo, C., Giai, C., Garófalo, A. &amp; Gómez, M. I. The Sbi protein contributes to Staphylococcus aureus inflammatory response during systemic infection . PLoS ONE 10 , e0131879 (2015).
- 68 . Abtin, A. et al. Perivascular macrophages mediate neutrophil recruitment during bacterial skin infection. Nat. Immunol. 15 , 45-53 (2014).
- 69 . Spinner, J. L., Hasenkrug, A. M., Shannon, J. G., Kobayashi, S. D. &amp; Hinnebusch, B. J. Role of the Yersinia YopJ protein in suppressing interleukin-8 secretion by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Microbes Infect. 18 , 21-29 (2016).
- 70 . Palm, N. W. &amp; Medzhitov, R. Pattern recognition receptors and control of adaptive immunity. Immunol. Rev. 227 , 221-233 (2009).
- 71 . Schiwon, M. et al. Crosstalk between sentinel and helper macrophages permits neutrophil migration into infected uroepithelium. Cell 156 , 456-468 (2014).
- 72 . Sacramento, L. et al. TLR9 signaling on dendritic cells regulates neutrophil recruitment to inflammatory foci following Leishmania infantum infection. Infect. Immun. 83 , 4604-4616 (2015).
- 73 . Abraham, S. N. &amp; John, A. L. Mast cell-orchestrated immunity to pathogens. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10 , 440-452 (2010).
- 74 . Krishna, S. &amp; Miller, L. S. Innate and adaptive immune responses against Staphylococcus aureus skin infections. Semin  Immunopathol. . 34 , 261-280 (2012).
- 75 . Malaviya, R., Ikeda, T ., Ross, E. &amp; Abraham, S. N. Mast cell modulation of neutrophil influx and bacterial clearance at sites of infection through TNFα . Nature 381 , 77-80 (1996).
- 76 . Huang, C. et al. Induction of a selective and persistent extravasation of neutrophils into the peritoneal cavity by tryptase mouse mast cell protease 6. J. Immunol. 160 , 1910-1919 (1998).
- 77 . Malaviya, R. &amp; Abraham, S. N. Role of mast cell leukotrienes in neutrophil recruitment and bacterial clearance in infectious peritonitis. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 67 , 841-846 (2000).
- 78 . Miller, L. S. et al. Inflammasome-mediated production of IL-1 β is required for neutrophil recruitment against Staphylococcus aureus in vivo. J. Immunol. 179 , 6933-6942 (2007).
- 79 . Shimada, T. et al. Staphylococcus aureus evades lysozyme-based peptidoglycan digestion that links phagocytosis, inflammasome activation, and IL-1 β secretion. Cell Host Microbe 7 , 38-49 (2010).
- 80 . Miller, L. S. et al. MyD88 mediates neutrophil recruitment initiated by IL-1R but not TLR2 activation in immunity against Staphylococcus aureus. Immunity 24 , 79-91 (2006).
- 81 . Sun, K., Salmon, S. L., Lotz, S. A. &amp; Metzger, D. W. Interleukin-12 promotes   interferon-dependent γ neutrophil recruitment in the lung and improves protection against respiratory Streptococcus pneumoniae infection. Infect. Immun. 75 , 1196-1202 (2007).
- 82 . Kabir, S. The role of interleukin-17 in the Helicobacter pylori induced infection and immunity. Helicobacter 16 , 1-8 (2011).

## REVIEWS

- 83 . Scapini, P . &amp; Cassatella, M. A. Social networking of human neutrophils within the immune system. Blood 124 , 710-719 (2014).
- 84 . Isailovic, N., Daigo, K., Mantovani, A. &amp; Selmi, C. Interleukin-17 and innate immunity in infections and chronic inflammation. J. Autoimmun 60 , 1-11 (2015).
- 85 . Rendon, J. L. &amp; Choudhry, M. A. Th17 cells: critical mediators of host responses to burn injury and sepsis. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 92 , 529-538 (2012).
- 86 . Mölne, L., Verdrengh, M. &amp; Tarkowski, A. Role of neutrophil leukocytes in cutaneous infection caused by Staphylococcus aureus. Infect. Immun. 68 , 6162-6167 (2000).
- 87 . Ley, K., Smith, E. &amp; Stark, M. A. IL-17A-producing neutrophil-regulatory Tn lymphocytes. Immunol. Res. 34 , 229-242 (2006).
- 88 . Xu, S. &amp; Cao, X. Interleukin-17 and its expanding biological functions. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 7 , 164-174 (2010).
- 89 . Cho, J. S. et al. IL-17 is essential for host defense against cutaneous Staphylococcus aureus infection in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 120 , 1762-1773 (2010).
- 90 . Liese, J., Rooijakkers, S. H., van Strijp, J. A., Novick, R. P . &amp; Dustin, M. L. Intravital two-photon microscopy of host-pathogen interactions in a mouse model of Staphylococcus aureus skin abscess formation. Cell. Microbiol. 15 , 891-909 (2013).
- 91 . Tan, R. S., Ho, B., Leung, B. P . &amp; Ding, J. L. TLR cross-talk confers specificity to innate immunity. Int. Rev. Immunol. 33 , 443-453 (2014).
- 92 . Deng, Q., Harvie, E. A. &amp; Huttenlocher, A. Distinct signalling mechanisms mediate neutrophil attraction to bacterial infection and tissue injury. Cell. Microbiol. 14 , 517-528 (2012).
- 93 . Yan, B. et al. IL-1 β and reactive oxygen species differentially regulate neutrophil directional migration and Basal random motility in a zebrafish injury-induced inflammation model. J. Immunol. 192 , 5998-6008 (2014).
- 94 . Hamza, B. &amp; Irimia, D. Whole blood human neutrophil trafficking in a microfluidic model of infection and inflammation. Lab. Chip 15 , 2625-2633 (2015).

This work shows that zymosan particles can 'trap' neutrophils and inhibit neutrophil fugetaxis in vitro.

- 95 . Liu, Y., Chen, G.-Y. Y. &amp; Zheng, P . CD24-Siglec G/10 discriminates danger- from pathogen-associated molecular patterns. Trends Immunol. 30 , 557-561 (2009).
- 96 . Chen, G.-Y. Y., Brown, N. K., Zheng, P . &amp; Liu, Y. Siglec-G/10 in self-nonself discrimination of innate and adaptive immunity. Glycobiology 24 , 800-806 (2014).
- 97 . Chen, G.-Y. Y., T ang, J., Zheng, P . &amp; Liu, Y. CD24 and Siglec-10 selectively repress tissue damage-induced immune responses. Science 323 , 1722-1725 (2009).
- 98 . Kruger, P. et al. Neutrophils: Between host defence, immune modulation, and tissue injury . PLoS Pathog. 11 , e1004651 (2015).
- 99 . Buckley, C. D., Gilroy, D. W., Serhan, C. N., Stockinger, B. &amp; T ak, P . P . The resolution of inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13 , 59-66 (2013).
- 100 . Hughes, J. et al. Neutrophil fate in experimental glomerular capillary injury in the rat. Emigration exceeds in situ clearance by apoptosis. Am. J. Pathol. 150 , 223-234 (1997).
- 101 .  Mathias, J. R. et al. Resolution of inflammation by retrograde chemotaxis of neutrophils in transgenic zebrafish. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 80 , 1281-1288 (2006). This paper is the first time that neutrophil reverse migration was visualized in vivo using zebrafish.
- 102 . Yoo, S. K. &amp; Huttenlocher, A. Spatiotemporal photolabeling of neutrophil trafficking during inflammation in live zebrafish. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 89 , 661-667 (2011).
- 103 . Hall, C. et al. T ransgenic zebrafish reporter lines reveal conserved Toll-like receptor signaling potential in embryonic myeloid leukocytes and adult immune cell lineages. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 85 , 751-765 (2009).
- 104 . Buckley, C. D. et al. Identification of a phenotypically and functionally distinct population of long-lived neutrophils in a model of reverse endothelial migration. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 79 , 303-311 (2006). This study identifies a subpopulation of human neutrophils that undergo rTEM in vitro. In addition, the authors identify this subpopulation in the human circulation in inflammatory conditions.

## REVI E W S

- 105 . Elks, P . M. et al. Activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 α (Hif-1 α ) delays inflammation resolution by reducing neutrophil apoptosis and reverse migration in a zebrafish inflammation model. Blood 118 , 712-722 (2011).
- 106 . Ellett, F ., Elks, P . M., Robertson, A. L., Ogryzko, N. V. &amp; Renshaw, S. A. Defining the phenotype of neutrophils following reverse migration in zebrafish. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 98 , 975-981(2015).
- 107 .  Robertson, A. L. et al. A zebrafish compound screen reveals modulation of neutrophil reverse migration as an anti-inflammatory mechanism . Sci. T ransl Med .
- 6 , 225ra29 (2014). This work shows how zebrafish can be used for high-throughput drug screens to identify small molecules that modulate neutrophil reverse migration.
- 108 . T auzin, S., Starnes, T . W., Becker, F . B., Lam, P .-Y. Y. &amp; Huttenlocher, A. Redox and Src family kinase signaling control leukocyte wound attraction and neutrophil reverse migration. J. Cell Biol. 207 , 589-598 (2014). This paper characterizes a macrophage ROS-SFK signalling pathway that mediates neutrophil reverse migration.
- 109 . Duffy, D. et al. Neutrophils transport antigen from the dermis to the bone marrow, initiating a source of memory CD8 +  T cells. Immunity 37 , 917-929 (2012).

This study shows that neutrophils can transport virus from the dermis to the bone marrow, providing a source of antigen that triggers proliferation of virus-specific memory CD8 +  T cells.

- 110 .  Woodfin, A. et al. The junctional adhesion molecule JAM-C regulates polarized transendothelial migration of neutrophils in vivo. Nat. Immunol. 12 , 761-769 (2011).

This is the first report of rTEM in vivo in an ischaemia-reperfusion mouse model.

- 111 .  Hamza, B. et al. Retrotaxis of human neutrophils during mechanical confinement inside microfluidic channels. Integr  Biol . . 6 , 175-183 (2014). This study reports that more than 90% of human neutrophils can move persistently against chemoattractant gradients over long distances (retrotaxis) using microfluidic channels.
- 112 . Vianello, F., Olszak, I. T . &amp; Poznansky, M. C. Fugetaxis: active movement of leukocytes away from a chemokinetic agent. J. Mol. Med. 83 , 752-763 (2005).
- 113 .  Starnes, T . W. &amp; Huttenlocher, A. Neutrophil reverse migration becomes transparent with zebrafish. Adv. Hematol. 2012 , 398640 (2012).
- 114 .  Tharp, W. G. et al. Neutrophil chemorepulsion in defined interleukin-8 gradients in vitro and in vivo. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 79 , 539-554 (2006).
- 115 .  Kuijpers, T . &amp; Lutter, R. Inflammation and repeated infections in CGD: two sides of a coin. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 69 , 7-15 (2012).
- 116 .  Serhan, C. N., Chiang, N., Dalli, J. &amp; Levy, B. D. Lipid mediators in the resolution of inflammation . Cold Spring Harb  Perspect  Biol . . . 7 , a016311 (2015).
- 117 .  Buckley, C. D., Gilroy, D. W. &amp; Serhan, C. N. Proresolving lipid mediators and mechanisms in the resolution of acute inflammation. Immunity 40 , 315-327 (2014).
- 118 .  Serhan, C. N. &amp; Chiang, N. Resolution phase lipid mediators of inflammation: agonists of resolution. Curr. Opin. Pharm. 13 , 632-640 (2013).
- 119 .  Colom, B. et al. Leukotriene B4-neutrophil elastase axis drives neutrophil reverse transendothelial cell migration in vivo. Immunity 42 , 1075-1086 (2015). This paper identifies a LTB -neutrophil elastase 4 pathway that cleaves endothelial JAMC, leading to neutrophil rTEM and systemic inflammation.
- 120 . Beyrau, M., Bodkin, J. V. &amp; Nourshargh, S. Neutrophil heterogeneity in health and disease: a revitalized avenue in inflammation and immunity. Open Biol. 2 , 120134 (2012).
- 121 . Holmes, G. R. et al. Drift-diffusion analysis of neutrophil migration during inflammation resolution in a zebrafish model. Adv. Hematol. 2012 , 792163 (2012).
- 122 . Holmes, G. R. et al. Repelled from the wound, or randomly dispersed? Reverse migration behaviour of neutrophils characterized by dynamic modelling. J. R. Soc., Interface 9 , 3229-3239 (2012). This report provides evidence that reverse migration of zebrafish neutrophils in vivo may represent a stochastic redistribution.

- 123 . Sadik, C. D., Kim, N. D. &amp; Luster, A. D. Neutrophils cascading their way to inflammation. Trends Immunol. 32 , 452-460 (2011).
- 124 . T sukamoto, T ., Chanthaphavong, R. S. &amp; Pape, H.-C. C. Current theories on the pathophysiology of multiple organ failure after trauma. Injury 41 , 21-26 (2010).
- 125 . Wu, D. et al. Reverse-migrated neutrophils regulated by JAM-C are involved in acute pancreatitis-associated lung injury. Sci. Rep. 6 , 20545 (2016).
- 126 . Hampton, H. R., Bailey, J., T omura, M., Brink, R. &amp; Chtanova, T. Microbe-dependent lymphatic migration of neutrophils modulates lymphocyte proliferation in lymph nodes. Nat. Commun. 6 , 7139 (2015). This report shows that photoconverted neutrophils migrate from inflamed skin to lymph nodes via the lymphatic circulation.
- 127 . Abadie, V. et al. Neutrophils rapidly migrate via lymphatics after Mycobacterium bovis BCG intradermal vaccination and shuttle live bacilli to the draining lymph nodes. Blood 106 , 1843-1850 (2005).
- 128 . Maletto, B. A. et al. Presence of neutrophil-bearing antigen in lymphoid organs of immune mice. Blood 108 , 3094-3102 (2006).
- 129 . Wright, H. L., Moots, R. J. &amp; Edwards, S. W. The multifactorial role of neutrophils in rheumatoid arthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 10 , 593-601 (2014).
- 130 . Cantin, A. M. M., Hartl, D., Konstan, M. W. &amp; Chmiel, J. F. Inflammation in cystic fibrosis lung disease: Pathogenesis and therapy. J. Cyst. Fibros. 14 , 419-430 (2015).
- 131 . Cocco, G., Chu, D. C. C. &amp; Pandolfi, S. Colchicine in clinical medicine. A guide for internists. Eur. J. Internal Med. 21 , 503-508 (2010).
- 132 . Lazaar, A. L. et al. SB-656933, a novel CXCR2 selective antagonist, inhibits ex vivo neutrophil activation and ozone-induced airway inflammation in humans. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 72 , 282-293 (2011).
- 133 . Moss, R. B. et al. Safety and early treatment effects of the CXCR2 antagonist SB-656933 in patients with cystic fibrosis. J. Cyst. Fibros. 12 , 241-248 (2013).
- 134 . Horuk, R. Chemokine receptor antagonists: overcoming developmental hurdles. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 8 , 23-33 (2009).
- 135 . Dalli, J. et al. Resolvin D3 and aspirin-triggered resolvin D3 are potent immunoresolvents. Chem. Biol. 20 , 188-201 (2013).
- 136 . Eickmeier, O. et al. Aspirin-triggered resolvin D1 reduces mucosal inflammation and promotes resolution in a murine model of acute lung injury. Mucosal Immunol. 6 , 256-266 (2013).
- 137 . Schwab, J. M., Chiang, N., Arita, M. &amp; Serhan, C. N. Resolvin E1 and protectin D1 activate inflammationresolution programmes. Nature 447 , 869-874 (2007).
- 138 . Dovi, J. V., He, L.-K. K. &amp; DiPietro, L. A. Accelerated wound closure in neutrophil-depleted mice. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 73 , 448-455 (2003).
- 139 . Li, L., Yan, B., Shi, Y.-Q. Q., Zhang, W.-Q. Q. &amp; Wen, Z.-L. L. Live imaging reveals differing roles of macrophages and neutrophils during zebrafish tail fin regeneration. J. Biol. Chem. 287 , 25353-25360 (2012).
- 140 . Paoliello-Paschoalato, A. B. et al. Isolation of healthy individuals' and rheumatoid arthritis patients' peripheral blood neutrophils by the gelatin and FicollHypaque methods: comparative efficiency and impact on the neutrophil oxidative metabolism and Fc γ receptor expression. J. Immunol. Methods 412 , 70-77 (2014).
- 141 . Collins, S. J., Ruscetti, F . W., Gallagher, R. E. &amp; Gallo, R. C. T erminal differentiation of human promyelocytic leukemia cells induced by dimethyl sulfoxide and other polar compounds. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 75 , 2458-2462 (1978).
- 142 . T ucker, K. A., Lilly, M. B., Heck, L. &amp; Rado, T . A. Characterization of a new human diploid myeloid leukemia cell line (PLB-985) with granulocytic and monocytic differentiating capacity. Blood 70 , 372-378 (1987).
- 143 . Berthier, E., Surfus, J., Verbsky, J., Huttenlocher, A. &amp; Beebe, D. An arrayed high-content chemotaxis assay for patient diagnosis. Integr. Biol. 2 , 630-638 (2010).
- 144 . Montanez-Sauri, S. I., Beebe, D. J. &amp; Sung, K. E. Microscale screening systems for 3D cellular microenvironments: platforms, advances, and challenges. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 72 , 237-249 (2015).
- 145 . Boneschansker, L., Yan, J., Wong, E., Briscoe, D. M. &amp; Irimia, D. Microfluidic platform for the quantitative analysis of leukocyte migration signatures. Nat. Commun. 5 , 4787 (2014).

- 146 . Yamahashi, Y. et al. Integrin associated proteins differentially regulate neutrophil polarity and directed migration in 2D and 3D. Biomed. Microdevices 17 , 100 (2015).
- 147 . Mantopoulos, D., Cruzat, A. &amp; Hamrah, P . In vivo imaging of corneal inflammation: new tools for clinical practice and research. Semin. Ophthalmol. 25 , 178-185 (2010).
- 148 . Ley, K. et al. Sequential contribution of L- and P-selectin to leukocyte rolling in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 181 , 669-675 (1995).
- 149 . Zarbock, A., Lowell, C. A. &amp; Ley, K. Spleen tyrosine kinase Syk is necessary for E-selectin-induced α β L 2 integrin-mediated rolling on intercellular adhesion molecule-1. Immunity 26 , 773-783 (2007).
- 150 . Emre, Y., Jemelin, S. &amp; Imhof, B. A. Imaging neutrophils and monocytes in mesenteric veins by intravital microscopy on anaesthetized mice in real time. J. Vis. Exp. 105 http://dx.doi.org/10.3791/53314 (2015).
- 151 . Jenne, C. N., Wong, C. H., Petri, B. &amp; Kubes, P . The use of spinning-disk confocal microscopy for the intravital analysis of platelet dynamics in response to systemic and local inflammation . PLoS ONE 6 , e25109 (2011).
- 152 . Looney, M. R. et al. Stabilized imaging of immune surveillance in the mouse lung. Nat. Methods 8 , 91-96 (2011).
- 153 . Wong, J. et al. A minimal role for selectins in the recruitment of leukocytes into the inflamed liver microvasculature. J. Clin. Invest. 99 , 2782-2790 (1997).
- 154 . Slaba, I. et al. Imaging the dynamic platelet-neutrophil response in sterile liver injury and repair in mice. Hepathology 62 , 1593-1605 (2015).
- 155 . Walters, K. B., Green, J. M., Surfus, J. C., Yoo, S. K. &amp; Huttenlocher, A. Live imaging of neutrophil motility in a zebrafish model of WHIM syndrome. Blood 116 , 2803-2811 (2010).
- 156 . Deng, Q., Yoo, S. K., Cavnar, P . J., Green, J. M. &amp; Huttenlocher, A. Dual roles for Rac2 in neutrophil motility and active retention in zebrafish hematopoietic tissue. Dev. Cell 21 , 735-745 (2011).
- 157 . Henry, K. M., Loynes, C. A., Whyte, M. K. &amp; Renshaw, S. A. Zebrafish as a model for the study of neutrophil biology. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 94 , 633-642 (2013).
- 158 . Lieschke, G. J., Oates, A. C., Crowhurst, M. O., Ward, A. C. &amp; Layton, J. E. Morphologic and functional characterization of granulocytes and macrophages in embryonic and adult zebrafish. Blood 98 , 3087-3096 (2001).
- 159 . Harvie, E. A. &amp; Huttenlocher, A. Neutrophils in host defense: new insights from zebrafish. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 98 , 523-537 (2015).
- 160 . Berthier, E. et al. Low-volume toolbox for the discovery of immunosuppressive fungal secondary metabolites. PLoS Pathog. 9 , e1003289 (2013).
- 161 . Graziano, B. R. &amp; Weiner, O. D. Self-organization of protrusions and polarity during eukaryotic chemotaxis. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 30 , 60-67 (2014).
- 162 . Deng, Q. &amp; Huttenlocher, A. Leukocyte migration from a fish eye's view. J. Cell Sci. 125 , 3949-3956 (2012).
- 163 . Baker, M. J., Pan, D. &amp; Welch, H. C. Small GTPases and their guanine-nucleotide exchange factors and GTPaseactivating proteins in neutrophil recruitment. Curr. Opin. Hematol. 23 , 44-54 (2016).
- 164 . Mócsai, A., Walzog, B. &amp; Lowell, C. A. Intracellular signalling during neutrophil recruitment. Cardiovasc . Res. 107 , 373-385 (2015).
- 165 . Weiner, O. D. Regulation of cell polarity during eukaryotic chemotaxis: the chemotactic compass. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14 , 196-202 (2002).
- 166 . Kölsch, V., Charest, P . G. &amp; Firtel, R. A. The regulation of cell motility and chemotaxis by phospholipid signaling. J. Cell Sci. 121 , 551-559 (2008).
- 167 . Afonso, P . V. &amp; Parent, C. A. PI3K and chemotaxis: a priming issue? Sci. Signal. 4 , pe22 (2011).
- 168 . Kunisaki, Y. et al. DOCK2 is a Rac activator that regulates motility and polarity during neutrophil chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 174 , 647-652 (2006).
- 169 . Welch, H. C. et al. P-Rex1, a PtdIns(3,4,5)P - and G 3 βγ -regulated guanine-nucleotide exchange factor for Rac. Cell 108 , 809-821 (2002).
- 170 . Heit, B., T avener, S., Raharjo, E. &amp; Kubes, P . An intracellular signaling hierarchy determines direction of migration in opposing chemotactic gradients. J. Cell Biol. 159 , 91-102 (2002).
- 171 . Raghuwanshi, S. K. et al. The chemokine receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2 couple to distinct G protein-coupled receptor kinases to mediate and regulate leukocyte functions. J. Immunol. 189 , 2824-2832 (2012).
- 172 . Yoo, S. K. et al. Differential regulation of protrusion and polarity by PI3K during neutrophil motility in live zebrafish. Dev. Cell 18 , 226-236 (2010).
- 173 . Beerman, R. W. et al. Direct in vivo manipulation and imaging of calcium transients in neutrophils identify a critical role for leading-edge calcium flux. Cell Rep. 13 , 2107-2117 (2015).
- 174 . Hu, N. et al. Differential expression of granulopoiesis related genes in neutrophil subsets distinguished by membrane expression of CD177. PLoS ONE 9 , e99671 (2014).
- 175 . Welin, A. et al. The human neutrophil subsets defined by the presence or absence of OLFM4 both transmigrate into tissue in vivo and give rise to distinct NET s in vitro  PLoS ONE . 8 , e69575 (2013).
- 176 . Fridlender, Z. G. et al. Polarization of tumorassociated neutrophil phenotype by TGFβ : 'N1' versus 'N2' TAN. Cancer Cell 16 , 183-194 (2009).
- 177 . Hartl, D. et al. Infiltrated neutrophils acquire novel chemokine receptor expression and chemokine responsiveness in chronic inflammatory lung diseases. J. Immunol. 181 , 8053-8067 (2008).
- 178 . Tirouvanziam, R. et al. Profound functional and signaling changes in viable inflammatory neutrophils homing to cystic fibrosis airways. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105 , 4335-4339 (2008).
- 179 . Bauer, S. et al. Proteinase 3 and CD177 are expressed on the plasma membrane of the same subset of neutrophils. J. Leukoc  Biol. . 81 , 458-464 (2007).
- 180 . Carmona-Rivera, C. &amp; Kaplan, M. J. Low-density granulocytes: a distinct class of neutrophils in systemic autoimmunity. Semin  Immunopathol. . 35 , 455-463 (2013).
- 181 . Drifte, G., Dunn-Siegrist, I., Tissières, P . &amp; Pugin, J. Innate immune functions of immature neutrophils in

- patients with sepsis and severe systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Crit. Care Med. 41 , 820-832 (2013).
- 182 . Bowers, N. L. et al. Immune suppression by neutrophils in HIV-1 infection: role of PD-L1/PD-1 pathway. PLoS Pathog. 10 , e1003993 (2014).
- 183 . Cloke, T . et al. Phenotypic alteration of neutrophils in the blood of HIV seropositive patients. PLoS ONE 8 , e72034 (2013).
- 184 . Matsushima, H. et al. Neutrophil differentiation into a unique hybrid population exhibiting dual phenotype and functionality of neutrophils and dendritic cells. Blood 121 , 1677-1689 (2013).
- 185 . Nair, P . et al. Safety and efficacy of a CXCR2 antagonist in patients with severe asthma and sputum neutrophils: a randomized, placebocontrolled clinical trial. Clin. Exp. Allergy 42 , 1097-1103 (2012).
- 186 . Opfermann, P. et al. A pilot study on reparixin, a CXCR1/2 antagonist, to assess safety and efficacy in attenuating ischaemia-reperfusion injury and inflammation after on-pump coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 180 , 131-142 (2015).
- 187 . Bertini, R. et al. Receptor binding mode and pharmacological characterization of a potent and selective dual CXCR1/CXCR2 non-competitive allosteric inhibitor.. Br. J. Pharmacol. 165 , 436-454 (2012).
- 188 . Leaker, B. R., Barnes, P . J. &amp; O'Connor, B. Inhibition of LPS-induced airway neutrophilic inflammation in healthy volunteers with an oral CXCR2 antagonist. Respiratory Res. 14 , 137 (2013)
- 189 . Miller, B. E. et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of danirixin (GSK1325756)

## REVI E W S

- -a selective CXCR2 antagonist  -in healthy adult subjects. BMC Pharmacol. Toxicol. 16 , 18 (2015).
- 190 . Jurcevic, S. et al. The effect of a selective CXCR2 antagonist (AZD5069) on human blood neutrophil count and innate immune functions. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 80 , 1324-1336 (2015).
- 191 . Nicholls, D. J. et al. Pharmacological characterization of AZD5069, a slowly reversible CXC chemokine receptor 2 antagonist. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 353 , 340-350 (2015).
- 192 . US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalT rials.gov [online], https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/ NCT01972776 (2016).
- 193 . US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalT rials.gov [online], https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/ctrsearch/trial/2012-005615-92/DE (2015).

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by US National Institutes of Health grant GM074827 to A.H. E.E.R. is supported by an individual fellowship from National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) of the National Institutes of Health under award number F32AI113956 and S.D.O. is supported by a European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO) fellowship. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

## Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing interests.

## DATABASES

clinicaltrials.gov: https://clinicaltrials.gov/

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF