<!-- image -->

## Ihe Journalof Immunology

RESEARCH ARTICLE | APRIL 15 1999

Gene Expression and Production of the Monokine Induced by IFNγ (MIG), IFN-Inducible T Cell α Chemoattractant (I-TAC), and IFNγ -Inducible Protein-10 (IP-10) Chemokines by Human Neutrophils 1 

Sara Gasperini; ... et. al

J Immunol (1999) 162 (8): 4928-4937.

https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.162.8.4928

## Related Content

A Second Step of Chemotaxis After Transendothelial Migration: Keratinocytes Undergoing Apoptosis Release IFN-γInducible Protein 10, Monokine Induced by IFN-γ, and IFN-γ-Inducible α-Chemoattractant for T Cell Chemotaxis Toward Epidermis in Atopic Dermatitis

J Immunol (July,2003)

Differential Expression of the IFN-γ-Inducible CXCR3-Binding Chemokines, IFN-Inducible Protein 10, Monokine Induced by IFN, and IFN-Inducible T Cell α Chemoattractant in Human Cardiac Allografts: Association with Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy and Acute Rejection

J Immunol (August,2002)

Chemokine Monokine Induced by IFN-γ/CXC Chemokine Ligand 9 Stimulates T Lymphocyte Proliferation and Effector Cytokine Production

J Immunol (June,2004)

## Gene Expression and Production of the Monokine Induced by IFNg (MIG), IFN-Inducible T Cell a Chemoattractant (I-TAC), and IFNg -Inducible Protein-10 (IP-10) Chemokines by Human Neutrophils 1

Sara Gasperini,* Martina Marchi,* Federica Calzetti,* Carlo Laudanna,* Lucia Vicentini, † Henrik Olsen, Marianne Murphy, ‡ ‡ Fang Liao, § Joshua Farber, and Marco A. Cassatella* § 2

Monokine induced by IFNg (MIG), IFN-inducible T cell a chemoattractant (I-TAC), and IFN--inducible protein of 10 kDa g (IP-10) are related members of the CXC chemokine subfamily that bind to a common receptor, CXCR3, and that are produced by different cell types in response to IFN- e have recently reported that human polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) have g . W the capacity to release IP-10. Herein, we show that PMN also have the ability to produce MIG and to express I-TAC mRNA in response to IFNg in combination with either TNF- or LPS. While IFNa g , alone or in association with agonists such as fMLP, IL-8, granulocyte (G)-CSF and granulocyte-macrophage (GM)-CSF, failed to influence MIG, IP-10, and I-TAC gene expression, IFNa , in combination with TNF- , LPS, or IL-1 , resulted in a considerable induction of IP-10 release by neutrophils. Fura b thermore, IL-10 and IL-4 significantly suppressed the expression of MIG, IP-10, and I-TAC mRNA and the extracellular production of MIG and IP-10 in neutrophils stimulated with IFN- plus either LPS or TNFg a . Finally, supernatants harvested from stimulated PMN induced migration and rapid integrin-dependent adhesion of CXCR3-expressing lymphocytes; these activities were significantly reduced by neutralizing anti-MIG and anti-IP-10 Abs, suggesting that they were mediated by MIG and IP-10 present in the supernatants. Since MIG, IP-10, and I-TAC are potent chemoattractants for NK cells and Th1 lymphocytes, the ability of neutrophils to produce these chemokines might contribute not only to the progression and evolution of the inflammator response, but also to the regulation of the immune response. The Journal of Immunology, 1999, 162: 4928-4937.

C hemokines regulate leukocyte trafficking, and their im-ated gene product (GRO), and other members express this motif portance in inflammatory processes is best illustrated bypredominantly exert stimulatory and chemotactic activities t their ability to specifically recruit discrete leukocyte pop-utrophils (1-3). In contrast, IFN- ucible protein of 10 ulations (1-3). Members of this large family of cytokines typically IP-10), monokine induced by IFN- (MIG), and the recently are 8- to 12-kDa proteins sharing 20 to 70% homology in aminocloned IFN-inducible T cell chemoattractant (I-TAC) (4) lack acid sequences (1-3). Chemokines have been classified into foure ELR sequence and fail to attract polymorphonuclear neutroclosely related subfamilies on the basis of the relative positions of PMN) (1-5). Interestingly, based on their structure and fun the first two cysteine residues, but only two of these subfamilies , MIG, IP-10, and I-TAC constitute a group of three related have been extensively characterized: the 'C-X-C' and the 'C-C'emokines that all act upon T lymphocytes (4-5). While the rechemokines (1-3). The C-X-C chemokines can be further subdi- ceptors for the C-X-C chemokines containing the ELR motif are vided into two classes depending on the presence of the glutamate- ressed on different types of leukocytes, there is thus far onl leucine-arginine (ELR) motif preceding the first two cysteines (1-le receptor, CXCR3, that is known to bind MIG, I-TAC, and 3). IL-8, macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) rowth3 , g rel and ward ne g -ind kDa ( g a th phils ( tion ch exp sing IP-10 (4-6). Importantly, CXCR3 (and CCR5) seem to be preferentially expressed on activated T lymphocytes of the Th1 phenotype (7-10).

Departments of *General Pathology and ediatric Clinic, University of Verona, Ve-† P rona, Italy;olecular Biology and Cell Biology Department, Human Genome Sci-‡ M ences, Inc., Rockville, MD 20850; and boratory of Clinical Investigation, National § La Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892

Received for publication August 4, 1998. Accepted for publication January 29, 1999.

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

Neutrophils are usually the first cells to arrive at a site of flammation and are essential for nonspecific host defense via the release of a variety of proteases, reactive oxygen intermediat and arachidonic acid metabolites (11). In addition to their def sive functions, it has become well established, both in vitro and vivo, that neutrophils can synthesize and secrete several cytoki and chemokines (12). Among the various chemokines, IL-8 (13, 14), MIP-1 ab (15), MIP-2 (16), GRO a (17, 18), and cytokineinduced neutrophil chemoattractant (CINC) (19) have been reported to be secreted following activation of PMN. More recently, we have demonstrated that human neutrophils possess the capacity to release IP-10 (20), but whether they can also express MIG and I-TAC has yet to be determined. address:

granulocyte-CSF; PMN, polymorphonuclear neutrophil; MIG, monokine induced by tractant; GRO, growth-related gene product; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage CSF; Y-IgG, yeast particles opsonized with IgG; IL-1ra, IL-1 receptor antagonist.

In this study, we show that, following stimulation with IFN-twice with PBS and then suspended in 1.5 ml hypotonic fluorochrome g in combination with either TNF- or LPS, neutrophils synthesize and solution (propidium iodide 50/ml in 0.1% sodium citrate and 0.1% a release MIG and express I-TAC mRNA. In addition, we show that IFNa together with TNF-, LPS, and IL-1, may represent ana b other potent stimulus for the generation of IP-10 by neutrophils and that IL-10, and to a lesser extent IL-4, can negatively modulate the expression of MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 in human neutrophils. o evaluate the chemotactic activities of neutrophil- and PBMC-derived Finally, we provide evidence of the functional significance of neu- rnatants, trophil-derived MIG and IP-10 in acting on CXCR3-expressing 300-19 mouse pre-B cell clones stably transfected with human CXCR3 lymphocytes. Materials and Methods Cell purification and culture Highly purified granulocytes ( 9.5%) and PBMC were isolated under . 9 endotoxin-free conditions from buffy coats of healthy donors, as previously described (21). The granulocyte populations contained usually -, 4% eo sinophils ( n 5 23), as revealed by May-Grunwald-Giemsa staining. Eo- in RPMI medium containing 1% FBS) were added to the bottom wells of sinophils (purity5%) were isolated by immunomagnetic beads, accord-. 9 ing to the method described by Hansel et al. (22). Immediately after eated cells were usually used undiluted, whereas supernatants fro purification, cells were suspended in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented resting or stimulated PMN were used either undiluted or after (approxi with 10% low-endotoxin FCS ( 0.009 ng/ml; Seromed, Biochrom, Berlin, , Germany) and usually treated with 100 U/ml IFN-21) (Hoffmann-La g ( Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 100 U/ml IL-10 (kindly provided by Dr. K. spended at 5 Moore, DNAX and Schering-Plough, Palo Alto, CA) (23), 1000 U/ml IFNa (Roferon-A; Hoffmann-La Roche), or 10 ng/ml IL-4 (Peprotech, 37°C, 5% CO Rocky Hill, NJ) in different combinations. Cells were then stimulated, ed, washed with PBS on the upper side, fixed, and stained with plated at 5 3 10 6 /ml either in 24-well tissue culture plates (Nunc, Roskilde, uik (Baxter, Deerfield, IL). The number of cells migrating to the Denmark) or in polystyrene flasks (Greiner, Nurtingen, Germany), and wer surface was microscopically counted in six randomly high powered cultured at 37°C, 5% CO atmosphere. Cell agonists used were the fol- elds. All assays were performed in triplicate. Spontaneous migration wa 2 lowing: 1 m g/ml LPS (from Escherichia coli , serotype 026:B6, purchased from Sigma, St. Louis, MO), 5 ng/ml TNF-(Peprotech), heat-killed yeast erived a particles opsonized with IgG (Y-IgG) at a particle/cell ratio of 2:1, 10 nM or 30 min with 30 fMLP (Sigma), 10 ng/ml GM-CSF (Genetics Institute, Boston, MA), 1000 U/ml G-CSF (Granulokine; Hoffmann-La Roche), 20 ng/ml IL-1 b (Hazleton Laboratories, Vienna, VA), and 50 ng/ml IL-8 (Sandoz, Vienna, ndoz, Vienna), mouse anti-human TNF-and IFNAustria). At the indicated times, cell-free supernatants were harvested and iorgio Trinchieri, Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA), and isoty stored at 20°C, whereas cell pellets were extracted for total RNA. All ched Abs, to neutralize their chemotactic activities. 2 reagents used were of the highest available grade and were dissolved in hemotaxis pyrogen-free water for clinical use (20, 21, 23). m g Triton X-100). The mixture was placed in the dark overnight at 4°C. The fluorescence of each individual nucleus was measured using a FACScan flow cytometer (XL-Coulter, Hialeah, FL). In vitro chemotaxis assay T supe we used, as target cells, either the previously descri cDNA (6) or PHA-stimulated peripheral T lymphocytes cultured in the presence of IL-2 for 8-14 days. CXCR3 receptor expression on transfected cells or activated T cells was checked by FACScan analysis by using 1C6, an anti-hCXCR3 mAb (7), kindly provided by Dr. Carlo Agostini (University of Padova, Italy). Migration of CXCR3 transfectants was assessed in a 48-well modified Boyden chamber (NeuroProbe, Cabin John, MD) using polyvinylpyrrolidone-free polycarbonate membranes (Nucleo pore) with 5- m pores, as we previously described (26). In brief, leukocytem derived supernatants (28 ) or 10 nM recombinant MIG or IP-10 (diluted m l the chemotaxis chamber. PBMC-derived supernatants from resting or IFNg -tr mately) a 100-fold concentration (by the Centricon Plus 20 device; Amicon, Beverly, MA). The parental cell line and CXCR3 transfectants were su 3 10 6 /ml in RPMI and added to the top wells of the chamber in a volume of 50 l. Chambers were then incubated for 120 min in a m 2 atmosphere. After the incubation period, the filters were remov Dif-Q lo fi determined in the absence of samples. In selected experiments, leukocyte d supernatants or recombinant chemokines were preincubated at 37°C f m g/ml of rabbit anti-human MIG (No. 500-P50, Peprotech), goat anti-human IP-10 (No. AF-266-NA; R&amp;D Systems, Abingdon, U.K.), goat anti-human IL-8 (kindly provided by Dr. M. Ceska, Sa a g (kindly provided by Dr. G mat

MIG, IP-10, and IL-8 antigenic determination

RNA isolation and Northern blot analysis Total RNA from PMN and PBMC was extracted by the guanidinium isothiocyanate method, usually from 6-7 10 3 7 PMN and 2-3 3 10 7 PBMC per condition, and analyzed as already described (21). Filters were hybrid- p chamber, whereas 600l of leukocyte-derived supernatants or 10 ized using MIG, I-TAC, IP-10, IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra), IL-8, ecombinant chemokines were added to the bottom well. The chambers glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPD), and actin cDNA were then incubated fo 2 h at 37° in antmosphere containing 5% CO. fragments, 2 3 P-labeled using a Ready-to-go DNA labeling kit (Pharmacia,ells that passed through the membrane were harvested from the lower Uppsala, Sweden). C was also assessed using a 24-well transwell (6.5-mm diameter, 5- m pore size, Costar 3421; Corning Costar, Rochesm ter, NY), essentially as described by Gosling et al. (27). In brief, the rental cell line and CXCR3 transfectants or activated T lymphocytes were suspended at 2 3 10 6 /ml in RPMI 1640, containing 10% FCS and 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.2. One hundred microliters of cell suspension were added to the to m nM r r a 2 C well and counted by using the CyQuant Cell proliferation assay kit (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), according to the manufacturer's instruction

Adhesion assay

MIG protein was measured in the cell-free supernatants by using a specific double-determinant RIA, developed in our laboratory. Briefly, flat-bottom n T lymphocytes expressing CXCR3 were used in these assays. T 96-well plates (MaxiSorp, No. 439454; Nunc) were coated with 50ell m l/w of protein-G-purified rabbit serum (No. 5092; Ref. 24) (40in 0.1 M m g/ml carbonate buffer, pH 9.5) for 24 h at 4°C, and then extensively washed with plete medium containing 500 U/ml IL-2 (Proleukin; Chiron DiagnosPBS, pH 7.5, 0.05% Tween 20 (washing buffer). Fifty microliters per well c, Cassina de' Pecchi, Italy) and 5 l PHA. Subsequently, T cells of either MIG standards (Peprotech) or cell-derived culture supernatants aintained at a density of 3-5 10 /ml in fresh media containing were then added, followed by an incubation fo h at20°C. Plates were r 6 rinsed with washing buffer before addition of 50 ell of m l/w 125 I-labeled rabbit anti-human MIG (No. 500-P50; Peprotech) (0.5ml in PBSm g/ Tween with 50% FCS) and incubated overnight at 4°C. After extensive lymphocytes were washed and resuspended at 510 /ml in PBS, 1 mM washings of the plates, 60 of 1 N NaOH was added into each well, m l harvested after 30 min, and read in a gamma counter. This RIA had a cell suspension (10ells) were allowed to settle for 10 min at 37°C on detection limit of 30-50 pg/ml and did not cross-react with well glass slides precoated for 16 h at 4°C with 20purified human 100 ng/ml IP-10, 100 ng/ml IL-8, 1 ng/ml MIP-1 10 ng/ml GRO a , a , 10 ng/ml IFN- , 5 ng/ml IL-10, 10 ng/ml IL-1 10 ng/ml TNF- , or g b , a 10 ng/ml GM-CSF. IP-10 and IL-8 were measured in the cell-free leukocyte-derived supernatants or with 5 f recombinant chemokines supernatants by, respectively, RIA (detection limit 30 pg/ml) and ELISA (detection limit 20 pg/ml), according to the procedures previously e published (13, 20). Estimation of apoptotic cells Flow cytometric analysis of apoptosis was performed by using the methodperiments, specific Abs were used to neutralize the biological effects described by Nicoletti et al. (25). In brief, harvested cells were washed inant chemokines or leukocyte-derived supernatants (see above). Huma cells were first purified from PBMC by E-rosetting with neuraminidasetreated sheep RBC and then incubated (2 10 /ml) at 37°C for 3 days in 3 6 com ti m g/m were m 3 6 250 U/ml IL-2 to optimize the induction of CXCR3 expression and their responsiveness to IP-10 and MIG, as recently reported by Cole et al. (4) and Loetscher et al. (28). At the days indicated in the results, activat 3 6 Ca 2 1 /Mg 2 1 , 10% heat-inactivated FCS (pH 7.2). Twenty microliters of 5 c 18m l of fibronectin (20g/ml in PBS; Sigma, F 6277). After the cells were allowed m to settle, lymphocyte adhesion was stimulated for 2 min with 5 m l of m l o (100 nM final concentration), added at the 12 o'clock position of the well At th appropriate time point, the slide was dipped twice in ice-col HBSS/10 mM HEPES to remove nonadherent cells, and bound cells were then fixed in ice cold PBS containing 1.5% gluteraldehyde. Adherent cells in 0.2 mm 2 were calculated by computer-assisted enumeration. In selected ex recomb

Table I. Extracellular release of MIG by human PMN (pg/ml) a

|                 | 21 h                  | 42 h                    |
|-----------------|-----------------------|-------------------------|
| Medium          | nd ( n 5 12)          | nd ( n 5 12)            |
| LPS             | nd ( n 5 10)          | nd ( n 5 10)            |
| TNF- a          | nd ( n 5 10)          | nd ( n 5 10)            |
| IL-1 b          | nd ( n 5 4)           | nd ( n 5 4)             |
| IL-8            | nd ( n 5 2)           | nd ( n 5 2)             |
| fMLP            | nd ( n 5 2)           | nd ( n 5 2)             |
| G-CSF           | nd ( n 5 3)           | nd ( n 5 3)             |
| GM-CSF          | nd ( n 5 3)           | nd ( n 5 3)             |
| IFN- g          | nd ( n 5 12)          | nd ( n 5 12)            |
| IFN- g 1 LPS    | 23.1 6 11.2 ( n 5 12) | 159.4 6 93.4 ( n 5 12)  |
| IFN- g 1 TNF- a | 70.3 6 45 ( n 5 12)   | 642.7 6 262.5 ( n 5 12) |
| IFN- g 1 IL-1 b | nd ( n 5 4)           | nd ( n 5 4)             |
| IFN- g 1 IL-8   | nd ( n 5 2)           | nd ( n 5 2)             |
| IFN- g 1 fMLP   | nd ( n 5 2)           | nd ( n 5 2)             |
| IFN- g 1 G-CSF  | nd ( n 5 3)           | nd ( n 5 3)             |
| IFN- g 1 GM-CSF | nd ( n 5 3)           | nd ( n 5 3)             |

a PMN (5 3 10 6 /ml) were stimulated as indicated in Materials and Methods for 21 and 42 h. MIG was determined in the cell-free supernatants by a specific RIA. Values are means 6 parentheses, nd, not detectable.

the SD was calculated. Results are representative from at least two inde- tive of four. pendent donors.

Each experiment was performed in quadruplicate for each condition, and plicate assays for each condition, obtained from one experiment repre SD, obtained from the number of experiments indicated in MIG by stimulated neutrophils. PMN (5 10 /ml) were stimulated with FIGURE 1. Dose-response studies for the extracellular production of 3 6 increasing doses of TNF-or LPS, in the presence of 100 U/ml IFNa g . Cell-free supernatants were collected after 42 h, and the levels of MI protein were measured by RIA. Each panel shows the mean values of du senta

<!-- image -->

Statistical analysis

for up to 42 h with a series of neutrophil agonists, including LPS, detected TNFa , IL-1, IL-8, fMLP, G-CSF, and GM-CSF, used either as b single stimuli or in combination with IFN-shown in Table I, g . As only IFNg plus either LPS or TNF-stimulated a detectable exa tracellular release of MIG. Surprisingly, up to 50,000 U/ml IFN-gain further insights into the molecular mechanisms regulatin g did not induce any significant extracellular production of MIG production by PMN, neutrophils were stimulated with varifrom PMN (data not shown). Dose-response experiments further ous combinations of agonists, and total RNA was analyzed by established that, in IFN-eated neutrophils, 5 ng/ml TNF- pg -tr a re resented an optimal concentration for MIG release, whereas theed whether neutrophils might express I-TAC mRNA. As shown stimulatory effect of LPS did not substantially differ over a wide g. 4, resting neutrophils, as well IFN- ated PMN, do not concentration range, i.e., from 0.01 to 10(Fig. 1). Accurate express detectable MIG or I-TAC transcripts. LPS or TNF- r m g/ml time course analyses (not shown) revealed that, in IFNg plus TNFa - or LPS-stimulated PMN, antigenic MIG started to be re-lone or in the the presence of IFN- lso failed to induce MIG or leased only after 18-21 h of stimulation and progressively accu-C gene expression (data not shown). In contrast, a considermulated into the supernatants for up to 42 h (Table I). In contrast, accumulation of MIG and I-TAC mRNA was observed in more than 80% or even 100% of the total antigenic IP-10 was already released within 21 h in response to IFN- s LPS and g plu IFNg plus TNFa , respectively (Table II) (20). Moreover, stim- le II. ulation of neutrophils for 42 h with IFN- s TNFg plu a consistently (in 12 independent experiments) led to the release of higher amounts of MIG than when the cells were stimulated with IFNg plus LPS, a pattern that was not always observed in the case of IP-10. Finally, considerable amounts of IP-10 were released by neutrophils even when they were cultured in the presence of IFN- L-1 g in association with IL-1 but not with GM-CSF (Table II). b , Expression of MIG and I-TAC mRNAs in neutrophils and PBMC To MIG Northern blot analysis. In the same experiments, we also investi gat in Fi A g -tre a , o other stimuli such as Y-IgG, fMLP, G-CSF, and GM-CSF, used a g , a I-TA able Tab Extracellular release of IP-10 by human PMN (pg/ml) a

Data are expressed as means SD. 6 Results MIG release by stimulated neutrophils To investigate whether PMN produce MIG, cells were incubatedLPS-treated cells (Fig. 3). However, the highest levels of antige TNFa . As illustrated in Fig. 2, eosinophils did not produce MIG but they did produce IP-10. However, substantial release of IP-1 by eosinophils occurred only in response to IFN- s TNFg plu a . In contrast to neutrophils and eosinophils, PBMC treated with IFNg released amounts of MIG higher than those detected in IFN- s g plu MIG in PBMC culture supernatants were observed in IFNg plus TNFa -treated cells (Fig. 3).

MIG and IP-10 release by stimulated eosinophils and PBMC

To exclude a role for contaminating cells present in our neutrophil preparations, we determined the ability of eosinophils and PBMC to release MIG and IP-10. For this purpose, in selected experi- PMN (5 ments, eosinophils and PBMC were purified (in addition to neutrophils) and stimulated for 21 h with IFN- s either LPS or g plu IFNg 1

|                 | 21 h                   | 42 h                  |
|-----------------|------------------------|-----------------------|
| Medium          | nd ( n 5 12)           | nd ( n 5 12)          |
| LPS             | nd ( n 5 10)           | nd ( n 5 10)          |
| TNF a           | nd ( n 5 10)           | nd ( n 5 10)          |
| I b             | nd ( n 5 4)            | nd ( n 5 4)           |
| GM-CSF          | nd ( n 5 3)            | nd ( n 5 3)           |
| IFN- g          | 51.2 6 29 ( n 5 12)    | 62.8 6 44 ( n 5 12)   |
| IFN- g 1 LPS    | 2289 6 1353 ( n 5 12)  | 2808 6 1340 ( n 5 12) |
| IFN- g 1 TNF- a | 3215 6 145.3 ( n 5 12) | 3194 6 1523 ( n 5 12) |
| IFN- g 1 IL-1 b | 262 6 99 ( n 5 4)      | 373 6 135 ( n 5 4)    |
| GM-CSF          | 48.2 6 12 ( n 5 3)     | 36 6 14 ( n 5 3)      |

a 3 10 6 /ml) were stimulated as indicated in Materials and Methods for 21 and 42 h. IP-10 was determined in the cell-free supernatants by a specific RIA. Values are means 6 SD, obtained from the number of experiments indicated in parentheses. nd, not detectable.

FIGURE 2. Ability of eosinophils to release MIG and IP-10. Purified populations of eosinophils were cultured with IFN-ne or in the presg , alo ence of either 1g/ml LPS or 5 ng/ml TNFm a . Cell-free supernatants were collected after 21 h, and the levels of MIG and IP-10 protein were measured by RIA. Values represent the mean SD calculated from three 6 independent experiments.

<!-- image -->

scripts were also highly expressed under those stimulatory condi- were stimulated either with 1g/ml LPS, or with 5 ng/ml TNF-, tions, in agreement with our previous data (20). However, kinetics e presence or absence of 100 U/ml IFN- Cell-free supernatants were of IP-10 mRNA expression in IFN- plus LPS-treated neutrophilscollected after 21 h, and the levels of MIG and IP-10 proteins were meacells; as in the sured by RIA. Values represent the meanSD calculated from seven FIGURE 3. Extracellular production of MIG by stimulated PBMC m a in th g . 6 independent experiments. The asterisks represent significant difference b tw g g plus LPS-treated PBMC. ppp , p , 0.005.

<!-- image -->

PMN stimulated with IFN-, plus either TNF- or LPS, with maxg a imal expression levels being reached by 21 h, especially in the case of IFNg plus TNFa -treated cells (Fig. 4 IP-10 mRNA tranA ). g differed greatly from those of IFN- us TNFg pl a former condition, IP-10 transcripts reached a maximum and t 3 h then declined, whereas in the latter maximal levels of IP-10 mRNA een IFN- - and IFNwere detected at 21 h (Fig. 4 A ).

Fig. 4 B shows a representative Northern blot analysis of MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 mRNA accumulation in PBMC, stimulated as neutrophils. It is evident that IFN-e represents already anthis inhibitory effect being much more pronounced in PMN stimg alon optimal stimulus to induce the mRNA expression for all three che- ated with IFN-plus LPS (Fig. 5), as opposed to IFN-plus mokines and that LPS (but not TNF- ) down-modulates the upa regulatory effect of IFN- Fig. 4), in accord with extracellular ect of IFN- plus either LPS or TNF- on IL-1ra transcripts, g ( B chemokine detection (Fig. 3). Effects of IL-10 and IL-4 Because IL-10 and IL-4 are negative modulators of chemokine at 21 (not shown) and 42 h poststimulation (Fig. 6), especially o they might also influence the inducible expression of MIG, I-TAC, and rately suppressed MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 mRNA accumulation TAC, and IP-10 induced by IFN- plus either LPS or TNF- , with g a ul g A g TNFa (Fig. 5). However, IL-10 potentiated the stimulatory efB f g a confirming and extending previous findings (30, 31). Consistent with the Northern blot data, a potent inhibitory action of IL-10 w observed at the level of MIG and IP-10 extracellular release, bot IFN g plus LPS-treated PMN. Relative to IL-10, IL-4 only mode

production by neutrophils (29), we investigated whether IP-10. IL-10 greatly reduced the mRNA expression for MIG, I- (not shown), as well as MIG and IP-10 release in neutrophils. In

FIGURE 4. Comparative ability of neutrophils and PBMC to express MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 mRNA. Purified populations of PMN () and PBMC ( A B ) isolated from the same donor were cultured with IFN- , alone or in the presence of g either LPS or TNF- . After 3 and 21 h, a total RNA was extracted, and Northern blot analysis of MIG, I-TAC, IP-10, and actin mRNA was performed. Ten micrograms total RNA were loaded on each gel lane. The experiment depicted in this is representative of four.

<!-- image -->

PMN

PBMC

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 5. Effect of IL-10 on MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 chemokine mRNA expression in stimulated neutrophils. Total RNA was extracted from PMN cultured for 21 h with IFN-plus LPS ( ), or with IFN-plus g A g TNFa ( ), in the presence or absence of IL-10 (100 U/ml). MIG, I-TAC, B IP-10, and IL-1ra mRNA accumulation was evaluated by Northern blot analysis. This experiment is representative of three.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6 also illustrates that IL-10 markedly inhibits MIG and IP-10 release also in PBMC cultured for 21 h. In three independent experiments, suppression of MIG and IP-10 release by IL-10 in cells treated with IFN- mounted g a to 91 6 7 and 92 6 3%, whereas, in those stimulated with IFN- us LPS and with IFNg pl g plus TNFa trophils (Fig. 6).

<!-- image -->

four independent experiments, IL-4-mediated inhibition of MIG and IP-10 secretion amounted to 34.5 16.2% and to 24 6 6 9%, respectively, in PMN stimulated for 42 h with IFN-s LPS, and g plu to 19.5 6 12% and 15.4 6 IFNg plus TNFa .

10%, respectively, in cells treated with -10 (100 U/ml). The cell-free supernatants were collected, and the leve FIGURE 6. Effect of IL-10 on MIG and IP-10 release by stimulated neutrophils and PBMC. PMN and PBMC were cultured for 42 h, respectively, with IFN- plus either LPS or TNF- , in the presence or absence of g a IL of MIG and IP-10 protein were determined by RIA. Values are the mean 6 SD of the percentage of IL-10 inhibition, calculated from six (for PMN) and three (for PBMC) independent experiments. The asterisks represent significant difference vs agonist-stimulated cells in the absence of ILp , p , 0.05; pp , p , 0.01.

, inhibition mediated by IL-10 was higher than in neu- was recently reported that IL-10 seems to block the protecti Assessment of neutrophil apoptosis Although neutrophils undergo constitutive apoptosis when aged in ted PMN cultured in the presence of IL-10 might be the convitro, there is considerable evidence to suggest that this process is e of an accelerated apoptotic process. To verify this po substantially delayed if cells are cultured in the presence of ago- ty, we measured the rates of neutrophil apoptosis under o nists such as LPS, IFN- G-CSF, or GM-CSF (32). In this context, experimental conditions. Table III shows that, after a 21 and 42 g , it effects of LPS and other cytokines, including IFN- TNFg and a , on the survival of cultured neutrophils (33). As a result, we soug to determine whether the reduced chemokine expression by stimula sequenc sibili

Table III. Effect of IL-10 on the rate of neutrophil apoptosis in vitro a

|                 | 2 IL-10                | 2 IL-10              | 1 IL-10                 | 1 IL-10              |
|-----------------|------------------------|----------------------|-------------------------|----------------------|
|                 | 21 h                   | 42 h                 | 21 h                    | 42 h                 |
| Medium          | 31.3 6 15.0 ( n 5 8)   | 61.5 6 13 ( n 5 5)   | 29.4 6 12.7 ( n 5 7)    | 62 6 11 ( n 5 5)     |
| LPS             | 17.7 6 11.8** ( n 5 6) | 51.2 6 16 ( n 5 5)   | 19.0 6 12.0 ## ( n 5 5) | 48 6 9 # ( n 5 5)    |
| IFN- g          | 17.0 6 9.4** ( n 5 8)  | 34.2 6 12** ( n 5 5) | 19.5 6 14.5 ## ( n 5 4) | not done             |
| IFN- g 1 LPS    | 15.3 6 8.0** ( n 5 5)  | 32.7 6 11** ( n 5 4) | 15.1 6 7.0 ## ( n 5 5)  | 32.5 6 8 ## ( n 5 5) |
| TNF- a          | 29.4 6 13.0 ( n 5 4)   | 50.3 6 18 (n 5 4)    | not done                | not done             |
| IFN- g 1 TNF- a | 13.1 6 7.5** ( n 5 4)  | 27.3 6 9** ( n 5 4)  | 13.4 6 7.1 ## ( n 5 4)  | 22 6 5 ## ( n 5 4)   |

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 8. Effect of IFN- on the extracellular production of IP-10 by a stimulated neutrophils. PMN were stimulated with 100 U/ml IFN-g/ml g , 1 m LPS, 5 ng/ml TNFa , or 20 ng/ml IL-1 , in the presence or absence of 1000 b U/ml IFNa . Cell-free supernatants were collected after 21 and 42 h, and th levels of IP-10 protein were measured by RIA. Values represent the mean 6 SD calculated from three to seven independent experiments. The asterisks represent significant difference between agonist-stimulated PMN and unstimula p , p , 0.05; pp , p , 0.01; ppp , p , 0.005.

<!-- image -->

culture period, recovery of live neutrophils was 69and 6 15% 48.5 6 13%, respectively; IFN- LPS, g , and, more effectively,IP-10, while cells from the nontransfected, parental cell line IFNg plus either LPS or TNF- were found to exert significant not respond. Supernatants harvested from neutrophils stimulate a protective effects on neutrophil apoptosis. Under those conditions, FNIL-10 influenced neither the spontaneous nor the cytokine-regu- ) and from IFN- -treated PBMC exerted significant chemolated apoptosis rate of neutrophils, yet maintaining its suppressive activities on CXCR3-transfected, but not on parental, ce effect on IL-8 release (not shown) (23). Effect of IFN-on MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 mRNA expression a and IP-10 production by neutrophils In the attempt to identify further stimulatory conditions able to neutrophils and PBMC, indicating that MIG and IP-10 were, fectants represent a reliable experimental model to determine t chemotactic activities of IP-10, MIG, and I-TAC and have been widely used by many investigators (4, 6, 28). As shown in Fig. 9, CXCR3-transfected cells readily migrated toward 10 nM MIG or with I g plus TNFa (or, to a lesser extent, with IFN- s g plu LPS g tactic (Fig. 9). By contrast, supernatants harvested from resting leuk cytes or from IFN- -stimulated PMN were ineffective. Of note, g neutralizing anti-MIG and anti-IP-10 Abs partially abrogated th chemotactic activities exerted by supernatants from both stimu lated a

FIGURE 7. Effect of IFN-on MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 mRNA expresa sion in human neutrophils and PBMC. Neutrophils and PBMC isolated from the same donor were incubated with 1000 U/ml IFN-After 3 h, a . total RNA was extracted and processed for Northern blot analysis of MIG, ted controls. I-TAC, IP-10, IL-8, and actin transcripts. Ten micrograms total RNA were loaded on each gel lane. The experiment depicted in this is representative of three.

<!-- image -->

Biological activities of neutrophil- and PBMC-derived supernatants To ascertain whether neutrophil-derived MIG and/or IP-10 were biologically active, we initially tested the ability of neutrophil- s 2 h. Values represent the mean SD of the number of cells derived supernatants to recruit CXCR3-positive cells in a chemo- ating in five high powered fields (HPF), calculated from three indetaxis assay in vitro. For this purpose, we used the mouse pre-B cellnt experiments. The asterisks represent significant differences. line, 300-19, stably transfected with CXCR3 cDNA. These trans- .05; FIGURE 9. Effect of neutrophil- and PBMC-derived supernatants on migration of stable CXCR3 transfectants. Mouse 300-19 transfectants expressing CXCR3 were challenged with neutrophil- and PBMC-derived supernatants and 10 nM recombinant chemokines in the presence or absence of the indicated Abs. Chemotaxis was performed in microBoyden chambers as described in Material and Methods . The incubation time for chemotaxis wa 6 migr pende p , p , 0 pp , p , 0.01.

induce expression of MIG, I-TAC, or IP-10 in neutrophils, we t least in part, responsible for these chemotactic effects (Fig examined the effect of IFN-used either alone or in association a , with other neutrophil agonists. As shown in Fig. 7, IFN- e a alon induced only IP-10 mRNA in neutrophils, while in PBMC it induced both IP-10 and I-TAC mRNA. MIG mRNA was not upregulated by IFN-in either cell type, as expected (34). In both a cell types, GM-CSF up-regulated IL-8 mRNA expression (29), while IFNa down-regulated the constitutive IL-8 transcripts in PBMC, as previously reported (35). The effect of IFN- IP-10 a on mRNA expression in neutrophils was synergistically potentiated by the simultaneous addition of LPS and TNF- not shown). Suba ( sequent assays on IP-10 protein release demonstrated that treatment of neutrophils for 42 h with IFN- n combination with a i IFN- , LPS, TNFg a , or IL-1, but not alone, resulted in a conb siderable release of antigenic IP-10 into the supernatants (Fig. 8). Preincubation of neutrophils fo with IFNr 5 h a or IFNg before stimulation with LPS, TNF, IL-1IL-8, fMLP, and GM-CSF did b , not augment the release of IP-10 or MIG, as compared with the chemokine release observed without preincubation (not shown).

FIGURE 10. Neutrophiland PBMC-derived supernatants induce rapid adhesion of activated T cells to fibronectin. Nine days IL-2treated T lymphocytes were allowed to adhere in the presence of supernatants or recombinant chemokines (100 nM) to slides coated with fibronectin, as described in Materials and Methods . Data (mean 6 SD values of triplicate wells) are expressed as absolute number of adherent T cells and represent one of three independent experiments. The asterisks represent significant differences. , ppp p , 0.005.

<!-- image -->

No additive effects were found if neutralizing anti-MIG and antiIP-10 Abs were used in combination (not shown). It must be pointed out that, to detect biological effects of the supernatants harvested from cultured PMN, it was necessary to concentrate kines them (approximately 100-fold) before assaying. Indeed, prelimi- ls and NK cells (1-6, 38, 39). MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 exert nary tests revealed that crude undiluted supernatants from agonist- effects through a shared receptor, called CXCR3 (4, 6). O stimulated neutrophils failed to exert chemotactic activities e, the CXCR3-expressing T cells have been shown to produce on CXCR3-transfected cells. Moreover, supernatants from - IFN- predominantly classical Th1 cytokines, supporting the concept th g stimulated PBMC displayed chemoattraction on either CXCR3- MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 selectively mobilize Th1 lymphocytes transfected cells or activated T lymphocytes (again, partially neu- . Studies in vitro have shown that MIG and IP-10 are also tralized by anti-MIG and anti-IP-10 Abs) also in the transwellve assay (not shown). Unfortunately, we could not test neutrophil- 41). In addition, in vivo, MIG and IP-10 inhibit neovascular derived supernatants in the transwell system because it was notion and exert antitumor effects in mouse models (42-46). MIG, feasible to obtain sufficient volumes (more than 4 ml) of concen-AC, and IP-10 are strongly induced by IFN- a range of cell trated samples that were necessary to perform experiments with alls, including monocytes, keratinocytes, endothelial cells, appropriate controls. Discussion MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 are three structurally related C-X-C chemo that mainly act as chemotactic factors for stimulate T cel their not (7-10) acti as inhibitors of colony formation by hemopoietic cell (40, izat I-T g in type astrocytes (4, 5).

Subsequently, we determined whether neutrophil-derived MIG We have recently shown that human neutrophils produce IP-10 or IP-10 could trigger rapid lymphocyte adhesion to purifed inte- . In this work, we demonstrate for the first time that neutro grin ligands, a recently reported biological function of some che- are also able to release MIG and to express I-TAC mRNA, mokines (36, 37). For this purpose, we used PHA-activated T lym- ut only under specific conditions. Indeed, extracellular release phocytes cultured in the presence of IL-2 for 6-14 days, which G in substantial amounts was found to require costimulation of show an optimal CXCR3 expression and responsiveness to IP-10, PMN with IFNMIG, and I-TAC (Refs. 4 and 28, and our unpublished data). Be- TNFcause CXCR3-transfected mouse cell lines displayed little binding his response. Similar data were obtained with endothelial ce to fibronectin in response to recombinant MIG or IP-10, they could not be used in these assays. As shown in Fig. 10, both MIG and IP-10 triggered a rapid adhesion of activated T lymphocytes to fibronectin that was completely inhibited by the respective neutralizing Abs. Preliminary experiments confirmed that IP-10- and MIG-induced rapid and firm adhesion of T cells was a transient phenomenon and was maximal after 2 min, exactly as recently reported by Piali et al. (37). No binding was induced in the absence of agonists. induced the rapid adhesion of activated T lymphocytes to fibronec- erved with IFN- plus LPS were mediated by the endogenous (20) phils b MI g along with either LPS or TNF- . IFNa g plus a reproducibly represented the most effective combination for t (37, 47). Strikingly, IFN- one, which represents the classical g al trigger of MIG production in other cell types (5), proved to b ineffective toward the extracellular release of MIG by neutrophi Other mediators, including GM-CSF, IL-1IL-8, and fMLP all b , failed to induce MIG gene expression and extracellular release b neutrophils, regardless of the presence of IFN-Ng or IF a in the culture medium. Opsonized particles (Y-IgG) used in combination with IFN- , which are known to induce high amounts of TNFg a production (29), had no effect on the induction of MIG release (our unpublished observations), thus making it unlikely that the effe obs g TNFa

Concentrated supernatants from IFN- lus TNFg p a -stimulated PMN and, to a lesser extent, from IFN-timulated PBMC also g -s tin (Fig. 10). In contrast, no detectable binding was triggered by (29). supernatants from resting cells or from IFN- mulated neutrog -sti phils (not shown). Importantly, adhesion triggering by superna- vailability of only the cDNA. Our experiments showed that tants was almost completely blocked by Abs to either MIG or I-TAC mRNA is expressed in neutrophils if they are cultured with IP-10 (Fig. 10), whereas isotype-matched and IFN-NF- -, g -, T a and IL-8-neutralizing Abs were completely ineffective (not ory conditions were found effective in inducing I-TAC mRNA shown), suggesting that MIG and IP-10 present in neutrophil-de-ression in neutrophils. Kinetic studies of I-TAC mRNA exrived supernatants were responsible for these biological effects.ion in neutrophils treated with IFN- s LPS or TNFWe could only investigate the gene expression of I-TAC, due to the a IFNg in association with either LPS or TNF-o other stimua . N lat exp press g plu a

revealed that, similarly to MIG transcripts, maximal levels of I-plus TNFTAC transcripts occurred at 21 h after stimulation. However, dif- city of IL-10 to negatively influence the effects of endotoxi ferently from MIG and IP-10 mRNA, I-TAC gene expression was not induced if neutrophils were stimulated under serum-free me- reby IL-10 down-regulates chemokine production in neutrodium conditions and cultured in FBS-precoated flasks (our unpub-ils, but we clearly established that IL-10 does not affect t lished observations). We have also greatly extended our previous findings on theates of neutrophil apoptosis. These findings completely exclud production of IP-10 by neutrophils (20). We now provide evidencee possibility that the suppression of MIG, IP-10, and other c that IL-1 and GM-CSF represent effective costimuli for IP-10okine release (29) depends on an induced decrease of neutrophil release by IFN- -treated neutrophils and that a significant releaseival by IL-10. On the other hand, our observations are in con of IP-10 by neutrophils can be obtained even if cells are stimulated t with those by Keel and colleagues (33), who reported that th data support the ability of type I IFNs to selectively up-regulate ontaneous apoptosis of cultured neutrophils was significant IP-10, which was previously reported to occur in monocytes and ecreased by coincubation with IL-10. At present, we have no other cells (34, 48-50). The distinctive patterns of MIG and IP-10anation for the discrepancies between our results and those considering that the regulatory sequences identified in the MIG trophil apoptosis was the same in both laboratories, it cannot and IP-10 promoters are quite different (51, 52). Since also IFN- cluded that other different experimental conditions used to i IFNg a -treated cells, in agreement with the powerful capa (57). We did not investigate further the molecular mechanisms whe ph strong protective effects of IFN- s either LPS or TNF-on the g plu a r th t surv tras inhibitory effect of LPS, TNF- IFN- , G-CSF, and GM-CSF on a , g the sp d expl Keel and coworkers. Although the assay performed to quantify neu ex late, to lyse, and to culture neutrophils might affect their res si

b g with IFNa in association with LPS, TNF-or IL-1. The latter a , b production in response to IFN- nd IFNg a a are understandable a , in addition to IL-12, IFN- TGF g , b , and hormones, has been reported to regulate Th1 development (53), production of IP-10 by veness to IL-10. IFNa those pathogens such as viruses.

Numerous studies have established that the production of proin- ely I-TAC might be significant considering the various biolog flammatory cytokines and chemokines by neutrophils can be mark-ical functions that these three chemokines possess. Generation edly modulated by immunoregulatory polypeptides such as IL-10IG, IP-10, and TAC by PMN may, for instance, contribute to (23, 29) or IL-4 (31, 56). Herein, we show that both IL-10 and IL-4 cruit Th1 lymphocytes to sites of inflammation. Therefore, along negatively control MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 mRNA expression and with the well-known capacity of neutrophils to release IL-8, MIPrelease in neutrophils, IL-10 being much more suppressive than , MIP-2, GRO IL-4. Inhibition of chemokine expression and release by IL-10 wasctants (CINCs) (29), our data reinforce the concept that neut more pronounced on IFNg plus LPS-treated neutrophils than on phils In conclusion, the ability of PMN to produce MIG, IP-10, and lik M re 1 ab a , and cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattra have the potential to regulate the migration of vario

-stimulated neutrophils may represent one of the mecha- In addition to the numerous descriptive findings outlined above nisms that contributes to Th1 responses essential for clearance of re also able to provide clear evidence for a functional sig Interestingly, the kinetics of IP-10 mRNA expression in, and t supernatants harvested from stimulated PMN, as well as from release by, IFN- or IFNg a plus LPS- or TNF- -treated PMN were a faster than those of MIG mRNA expression and release, or I-TACexpressing lymphocytes. These effects were partially neutraliz mRNA expression. Furthermore, neutrophils released much higher y anti-MIG and anti-IP-10 Abs, consistent with the presence of amounts of IP-10 than MIG under those conditions. The signifi- P-10 and MIG in leukocyte-derived supernatants, and in agreecance of a sequential regulated production of IP-10 and MIG (andnt with their capability to induce migration of CXCR3-positive likely I-TAC) by neutrophils is only a matter of speculation, but a s (4-6, 28). However, since neutralization of MIG and IP-10 similar pattern has been found in other cell types, for instance, t completely abolish cell migration, other CXCR3 ligands, endothelial cells and mouse macrophages (37, 47, 54). Another novel observation that we report in this study is that ribute to the observed chemotactic activities. According to o also eosinophils have the capacity to produce IP-10 but not MIG. ne expression data, one obvious candidate may be I-TAC. We However, differently from neutrophils, eosinophils were observeddemonstrate that supernatants from stimulated leukocytes tr to release significant levels of IP-10 only in response to IFN- ger g plus TNFa . The failure of IFN- plus LPS to induce IP-10 release inlymphocytes to fibronectin. Rapid integrin triggering is a funda g eosinophils is consistent with the poor ability of LPS to affect l step in the overall regulation of leukocyte diapedesis, un selected eosinophil functions, likely due to the lack of CD14 ex- iological as well as pathological conditions. Chemokines ar pression on these cells (55). Furthermore, we highlighted striking y to be physiological activators of integrin-dependent ad differences between PBMC and PMN with respect to their abilityion under flow and to direct lymphocyte extravasation and speto express or produce MIG, I-TAC, or IP-10. In fact, although in fic microenvironmental targeting in lymphoid tissues. In agree PBMC the most potent stimulatory combination for both mRNA accumulation and extracellular production of MIG, I-TAC, and ere able by themselves to trigger maximal lymphocyte adhesion IP-10 consisted of IFN- plus TNFg a , IFNg alone represented a highly effective stimulus. IFN- so powerful that its associa- ward either MIG or IP-10 reduced by more than 90% lymphocyte g was tion with LPS led to a diminished mRNA expression of MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 mRNA, and MIG and IP-10 production, relative This could suggest a threshold effect whereby MIG, IP-10, and to PBMC treated with IFN- alone. Taken together, the latter find- ikely other CXCR3 ligands (I-TAC?) can cooperate to trigger the g ings clearly indicate that the mechanisms governing the expression ired signal leading to integrin activation. Whatever is the c of MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 in neutrophils, eosinophils, and PBMC to our knowledge, these are the first demonstrations of relevan are specific and subjected to distinct regulatory pathways. Further- ological more, and not of lesser importance, they demonstrate that the re- s. It may therefore be postulated that neutrophil-derived MI sults obtained in neutrophils with respect to MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 are important in diapedesis and recruitment of immuIP-10 expression cannot be attributed to a contamination of thempetent T lymphocytes to sites of inflammation and disease. PMN populations with eosinophils or mononuclear cells. we we nificance of neutrophil-derived IP-10 and MIG. Indeed, we show tha stimulated PBMC, exert chemotactic activities toward CXCR3b I me cell did no probably present in leukocyte-derived supernatants, are likely cont ge also rapid integrin-dependent adhesion of PHA/IL-2-activated T menta phys likel s ci ment with very recent findings (37), recombinant IP-10 and MIG w to immobilized integrin ligands. Interestingly, neutralizing Abs adhesion triggered by supernatants from stimulated leukocytes l requ physi processes attributed to neutrophil-derived chem kine noco Downloaded from http://journals.aai.org/jimmunol/article-pdf/162/8/4928/1102285/im089904928o.pdf by guest on 15 October 2024

leukocytic cellular types into inflammatory sites. Alternatively, erini, S., F. Calzetti, M. P. Russo, M. De Gironcoli, and M. A. Cassatella neutrophil-derived MIG, IP-10, or I-TAC might negatively regulate hemopoiesis (40, 41). Production of MIG, IP-10, and I-TAC. Koch, A. E., S. L. Kunkel, M. R. Shah, S. Hosaka, M. M. Halloran, G. K. Haines, by neutrophils may also represent one of the mechanisms whereby these cells exert antitumor effects (58), in light of the well-established angiostatic properties of IP-10 and MIG (42-46). Granulo- Edamatsu, T., Y. Q. Xiao, J. Tanabe, S. Mue, and K. Ohuchi. 1997. Induction of cytes can mediate tumor cell killing through direct or bystander utrophil chemotactic factor production by staurosporine in rat peritoneal ne effects and can participate in the cross-talk with CD8 T cells, satella, which has been demonstrated to be instrumental in the rejection of . P. McDonald. 1997. Regulated production of the interferon- cible prospecific cytokine-transduced tumors (59, 60). Interestingly, such n-10 (IP-10) chemokine by human neutrophils. crosstalk was sustained by CD8 cell-produced IFN- 9). Alg (5 though it is still too early to speculate on an eventual in vivo role ry burst capability: studies on the gene expression of several NADPH oxidase of neutrophil-derived MIG, I-TAC, or IP-10, the initial question that must be answered is under which circumstances neutrophilsC. Walker. 1991. An improved immunomagnetic procedure for the isolation of uniquely produce these factors, considering that their in vitro ac- y purified human blood eosinophils. tivities are so overlapping if not identical. In any case, the selective activity of MIG, I-TAC, and IP-10 on activated T cells and prob-human polymorphonuclear leukocytes: evidence for an autocrine role of tumor ably NK cells is consistent with a role in regulating the trafficking osis factor and IL-1 n mediating the production of IL-8 triggered by lipoand/or function of effector cells during an immune response. 24. Liao, F., R. L. Rabin, J. R. Yannelli, L. G. Koniaris, P. Vanguri, and J. M. Farbe 17. Gasp 1995. Regulation of GRO a production in human granulocytes. J. Inflamm. 45: 143. 18 M. D. Burdick., R. M. Pope, and R. M. Strieter. 1995. Growth-related gene product-: a chemotactic cytokine for neutrophils in rheumatoid arthritis. a J. Clin. Invest. 155:3660. 19. ne trophils. Br. J. Pharmacol. 121:1651. 20. Cas M. A., S. Gasperini, F. Calzetti, A. Bertagnin, A. D. P g -indu tei Eur. J. Immunol. 27:111. 21. Cassatella, M. A., F. Bazzoni, R. M. Flynn, S. Dusi, G. Trinchieri, and F. Rossi 1990. Molecular basis of interferon-LPS enhancement of phagocyte respig and rato components. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 20241. 22. Hansel, T. T., I. J. De Vries, T. Iff, S. Rihs, M. Wandzilak, S. Betz, K. Blaser, a highl J. Immunol. Methods 145:105. 23. Cassatella, M. A., L. Meda, S. Bonora, M. Ceska, and G. Constantin. 1993. Interleukin 10 (IL-10) inhibits the release of proinflammatory cytokines from necr b i polysaccharide. J. Exp. Med. 178:2207.

Luste

- 1995. Human Mig chemokine: biochemical and functional characterization. J. Exp. Med. 182:1301.
- 25. Nicoletti, I., G. Migliorati, M. C. Pagliacci, F. Grignani, and C. A. Riccardi. 1 A rapid and simple method for measuring thymocyte apoptosis by propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry. J. Immunol. Methods 139:271.

## Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. B. Moser for kindly providing us with CXCR3 transfectants for help in the chemotaxis experiments.

- and Dr. C. Agostini for kindly providing us with the anti-CXCR3 Abs and6. Agostini, C., M. A. Cassatella, R. Zambello, L. Trentin, S. Gasperini, A. Peri 2 F. Piazza, M. Siviero, M. Facco, M. Dziejman, M. Chilosi, S. Qin, A. D. Luster, and G. Semenzato. 1998. Involvement of the IP-10 chemokine in sarcoid granulomatous reactions. J. Immunol. 139:641.

## References

- 1. Rollins, B. J. 1997. Chemokines. Blood 90:909.
- 2. Luster, A. D. 1998. Chemokines: chemotactic cytokines that mediate inflammation. N. Engl. J. Med. 338:436.
- 3. Baggiolini, M. 1998. Chemokines and leukocyte traffic. Nature 392:565.
- 4. Cole, K. E., C. A. Strick, T. J. Paradis, K. T. Ogborne, M. R. P. Gladue, W. Lin, J. G. Boyd, B. Moser, D. E. Wood, B. G. Sahagan, and K. Neote. 1998. Interferon-inducible T cell moattractant (I-TAC): a novel a che non-ELR CXC chemokine with potent activity on activated T cells through selective high affinity binding to CXCR3. J. Exp. Med. 187:2009 .
- 27. Gosling, J., F. S. Monteclaro, R. E. Atchison, H. Arai, C. L. M. A. Goldsmith, and I. F. Charo. 1997. Molecular uncoupling of C-C chemokine receptor 5-induced chemotaxis and signal transduction from HIV-1 coreceptor activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:5061.
- 28. Loetscher, M., P. Loetscher, N. Brass, E. Meese, and B. Moser. 1998. Lymphocytes-specific chemokine receptor CXCR3: regulation, chemokine binding and gene localization. Eur. J. Immunol. 28:3696.
- 29. Cassatella, M. A. 1996. Cytokines Produced by Polymorphonuclear Neutrophils: Molecular and Biological Aspects . Chapman &amp; Hall, R. G. Landes Co., Springer, Austin, TX pp. 1-199.

Loetscher,

- 5. Farber, J. M. 1997. Mig and IP-10: CXC chemokines that target lymphocytes. J. Leukocyte Biol. 61:246.
- 30. Cassatella, M. A., L. Meda, S. Gasperini, F. Calzetti, and S. Bonora. 1994. In terleukin 10 (IL-10) up-regulates IL-1 receptor antagonist production from l popolysaccharide-stimulated human polymorphonuclear leukocytes by delaying mRNA degradation. J. Exp. Med. 179:1695.
- 31. Marie, C., C. Pitton, C. Fitting, and J. M. Cavaillon. 1996. IL-10 and IL-4 syn ergize with TNF- to induce IL-1ra production by human neutrophils. a Cytokine 8:147.
- 32. Haslett, C. 1997. Granulocyte apoptosis and inflammatory disease. Br. Med. Bull. 53:669.
- 6. Loetscher, M., B. Gerber, P. Loetscher, S. A. Jones, L. Piali, I. Clark-Lewis, M. Baggiolini, and B. Moser. 1996. Chemokine receptor specific for IP10 and mig: structure, function, and expression in activated T-lymphocytes. J. Exp. Med. 184:963.
- 7. Qin, S., J. B. Rottman, P. Myers, N. Kassam, M. Weinblatt, M. Loetscher, A. E. Koch, B. Moser, and C. R. Mackay. 1998. The chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CCR5 mark subsets of T cells associated with certain inflammatory reactions. J. Clin. Invest. 101:746.
- 33. Keel, M., U. Ungethum, U. Steckholzer, E. Niederer, T. Hartung, O. Trentz, and W. Ertel. 1997. Interleukin-10 counterregulates proinflammatory cytokine-induced inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis during severe sepsis. Blood 90:3356.
- 34. Farber, J. M. 1993. HuMig: a new human member of the chemokine family of c Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 192:223.
- 35. Schnyder-Candrian, S., R. M. Strieter, S. L. Kunkel, and A. Walz. 1995. Intera and interferon- down-regulate g the production of interleukin-8 ENA-78 in human monocytes. J. Leukocyte Biol. 57:929.
- 8. Bonecchi, R., G. Bianchi, P. P. Bordignon, D. D'Ambrosio, R. Lang, A. Borsatti, S. Sozzani, P. Allavena, P. A. Gray, A. Mantovani, and F. Sinigaglia. 1998. Differential expression of chemokine receptors and chemotactic responsiveness ytokines. of type 1 T helper cells (Th1s) and Th2s. J. Exp. Med. 187:129.
- 9. Sallusto, F., D. Lenig, C. R. Mackay, and A. Lanzavecchia. 1998. Flexible pro- ferongrams of chemokine receptor expression on human polarized T helper 1 and 2 lymphocytes. J. Exp. Med. 187:875.
- 10. and J. M. Dayer. 1998. CCR5 is characteristic of Th1 lymphocytes. Nature 391: 344.
- Loetscher, P., M. Uguccioni, L. Bordoli, M. Baggiolini, B. Moser, C. Chizzolini, . C. Butcher. 1998. Chemokines and the arrest of lymphocytes rolling under 36. Campbell, J. J., J. Hedrick, A. Zlotnik, M. A. Siani, D. A. Thompson, and E flow conditions. Science 279:381.

- 11. Smith, J. A. 1994. Neutrophils, host defense, and inflammation: a double-edged B. Moser. 1998. The chemokine receptor CXCR3 mediates rapid and shearsword. J. Leukocyte Biol. 56:672. 37. Piali, L., C. Weber, G. LaRosa, C. R. Mackay, T. A. Springer, I. Clark-Lewis, and resistant adhesion-induction of effector T lymphocytes by the chemokines IP10 Eur. J. Immunol. 28:961.
- 13. Bazzoni, F., M. A. Cassatella, F. Rossi, M. Ceska, B. Dewald, and M. Baggiolini.protein-10 induces mononuclear cell infiltration in mice and promotes the mi1991. Phagocytosing neutrophils produce and release high amounts of the neu- gration of human T lymphocytes into the peripheral tissues and human peripheral trophil-activating peptide 1/interleukin 8. J. Exp. Med. 173:771. 38. Taub, D. D., D. L. Longo, and W. J. Murphy. 1996. Human interferon-inducible blood lymphocytes-SCID mice. Blood 87:1423.
- 12. Cassatella, M. A. 1995. The production of cytokines by polymorphonuclear neu- and Mig. trophils. Immunol. Today 16:21.
- 14. Strieter, R. M., K. Kasahara, R. Allen, H. J. Showell, T. J. Standiford, and aub, D. D., T. J. Sayers, C. R. Carter, and J. R. Ortaldo. 1995.cheS. L. Kunkel. 1990. Human neutrophils exhibit disparate chemotactic factor gene mokines induce NK cell migration and enhance NK-mediated cytolysis. expression. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 173:725. 39. T a and b J. Immunol. 155:3877.
- 15. Kasama, T., R. M. Strieter, N. W. Lukacs, M. D. Burdick, and S. L. Kunkel. 0. 1994. Regulation of neutrophil-derived chemokine expression by IL-10. J. Immunol. 152: 3559.
- 4 Sarris, A. H., H. E. Broxmeyer, U. Wirthmueller, N. Karasavvas, S. Cooper, L. Lu, J. Krueger, and J. V. Ravetch. 1993. Human interferon-inducible protein 10: expression and purification of recombinant protein demonstrate inhibition o ear J. Exp. Med. 178:1127.
- 41 Schwartz, G. N., F. Liao, R. E. Gress, and J. M. Farber. 1997. Suppressive effect of recombinant human monokine induced by IFN-(rHuMig) chemokine on the g number of committed and primitive hemopoietic progenitors in liquid cultures of CD34 1 human bone marrow cells. J. Immunol. 159:895.
- 42. Arenberg, D. A., S. L. Kunkel, P. J. Polverini, S. B. Morris, M. D. Burdick, M. C. Glass, D. T. Taub, M. D. Iannettoni, R. I. Whyte, and R. M. Strieter. 1996.
- 16. Xing, Z., M. Jordana, H. Kirpalani, K. E. Driscoll, T. J. Schall, and J. Gauldie.ly human hematopoietic progenitors. 1994. Cytokine expression by neutrophils and macrophages in vivo: endotoxin . induces tumor necrosis factor-acrophage inflammatory protein-2, interleua , m kin-1 , and interleukin-6 but not RANTES or transforming growth factorb b 1 mRNA expression in acute lung inflammation. [Published erratum appears in 1994 Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 10:346. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. .] Am 10:148.

- Interferon-inducible protein 10 (IP-10) is an angiostatic factor that inhibits ng, P., C. W. Severns, N. B. Guyer, and T. M. Wright. 1994. A unique g -human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumorigenesis and spontaneous metastases. J. Exp. Med. 184:981. 52. Wo palindromic element mediatesinterferon induction of mig gene expression. g Mol. Cell. Biol. 14:914.
- 43. Sgadari, C., J. M. Farber, A. L. Angiolillo, F. Liao, J. P. R. Burd, L. Yao, G. Gupta, C. Kanegane, and G. Tosato. 1997. Mig, the monokine induced by interferon- promotes tumor necrosis in vivo. g , Blood 89: 2635.
- Teruya-Feldstein, netti, 53. Ma R., F. Annunziato, L. Tomasevic, V. Gianno, P. Parronchi, S. Romagnani, and E. Maggi. 1995. Polyinosinic acid: polycytidylic acid promotes T helper type 1-specific immune responses by stimulating macrophage production of interferon-d interleukin-12. a an Eur. J. Immunol. 25:2656.
- 54 Farber, J. M. 1992. A collection of mRNA species that are inducible in the RAW 264.7 mouse macrophage cell line byinterferon and other agents. g Mol. Cell. Biol. 12:1535.
- 44. Angiolillo, A. L., C. Sgadari, N. Sheikh, G. H. Reaman, G. Tosato. 1995. Re- . gression of experimental human leukemias and solid tumors induced by EpsteinBarr virus-immortalized B cells. Leuk. Lymphoma 19:267.
- 45. Luster, A. D., and P. Leder. 1993. IP-10, a C-X-C- chemokine, elicits a potentTakanaski, S., R. Nonaka, Z. Xing, P. O'Byrne, J. Dolovich, and M. Jordana. thymus-dependent antitumor response in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 178:1057. 55. 1994. Interleukin 10 inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced survival and cytoki production by human peripheral blood eosinophils. J. Exp. Med. 180:711.
- 46. Tannenbaum, C. S., R. Tubbs, D. Armstrong, J. H. Finke, R. M. Bukowski, and T. A. Hamilton. 1998. The CXC chemokines IP-10 and Mig are necessary for IL-12-mediated regression of the mouse RENCA tumor. J. Immunol. 162: 927.
- 47. Ebnet, K., M. M. Simon, and S. Shaw. 1996. Regulation of chemokine gene expression in human endothelial cells by proinflammatory cytokines and Borrelia burgdorferi Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 797:107. .
- 56. Wertheim, W. A., S. L. Kunkel, T. J. Standiford, M. D. Burdick, F. S. Becker, C. A. Wilke, A. R. Gilbert, and R. M. Strieter. 1993. Regulation of neutrophilderived IL-8: the role of prostaglandin Eamethasone, and IL-4. 2 , dex J. Immunol. 151:2166.
- 57. Geissler, K. 1996. Current status of clinical development of interleukin-10. Curr. Opin. Hematol. 3:203.
- J. H. Finke. 1994. Chemokine gene expression in the murine renal cell carcinoma, availability elicits tumor rejection and systemic immunity through granulocyt Colombo, M. P., A. Modesti, G. Parmiani, and G. Forni. 1992. Local cytokine T-lymphocyte cross-talk. Cancer Res. 52:4853.
- 49. Luster, A. D., J. C. Unkeless, and J. V. Ravetch. 1985.rferon transcripg -inte tionally regulates an early-response gene containing homology to platelet pro- netically modified to release granulocyte colony-stimulating factor requir teins. Nature 315:672. 59. Stoppacciaro, A., C. Melani, M. Parenza, A. Mastracchio, C. Bassi, C. Baroni, G. Parmiani, and M. P. Colombo. 1993. Regression of an established tumor ge granulocyte-T cell cooperation and T cell-produced interferon g . J. Exp. Med. 178:151.
- 48. Sonouchi, K., T. A. Hamilton, C. S. Tannenbaum, R. R. Tubbs, R. Bukowski, and58. RENCA, following treatment in vivo with interferon- d a an interleukin-2. Am. J. Pathol. 144:747.
- 50. Vanguri, P., and J. M. Farber. 1990. Identification of CRG-2: an interferoninducible mRNA predicted to encode a murine monokine. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 15049.
- 51. Wright, T. M., and J. M. Farber. 1991. 5 gulatory region of a novel cytokine 9 re gene mediates selective activation by interferon g . J. Exp. Med. 173:417.
- 60. Cavallo, F., P. Signorelli, M. Giovarelli, P. Musiani, A. Modesti, M. J. Brund M. P. Colombo, and G. Forni. 1997. Antitumor efficacy of adenocarcinoma cells engineered to produce interleukin 12 (IL-12) or other cytokines compared with exogenous IL-12. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 89:1049.