## Journal Pre-proof

Human primary neutrophil mRNA does not contaminate human resolving macrophage mRNA after efferocytosis

M. Maraux, A. Gaillardet, A. Gally, P. Saas, T. Cherrier

<!-- image -->

PII:

S0022-1759(20)30094-6

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jim.2020.112810

Reference:

JIM 112810

To appear in:

Journal of Immunological Methods

Received date:

13 December 2019

Revised date:

20 May 2020

Accepted date:

15 June 2020

Please cite this article as: M. Maraux, A. Gaillardet, A. Gally, et al., Human primary neutrophil mRNA does not contaminate human resolving macrophage mRNA after efferocytosis, Journal of Immunological Methods (2019), https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jim.2020.112810

This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

© 2019 Published by Elsevier.

## Journal Pre-proof

Human  primary neutrophil mRNA  does  not  contaminate resolving  macrophage  mRNA after efferocytosis M. Maraux 1 ,  A. Gaillardet 1 , A. Gally 1 , P. Saas  1 , T. Cherrier 1, *

## human

- 1: Univ.  Bourgogne Franche-Comté,  INSERM,  EFS  BFC,  UMR1098,  Interactions  Hôte-Greffon-Tumeur/Ingénierie Cellulaire  et Génique, Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire INCREASE, LabEx  LipSTIC, F-25000 Besançon, France
- * Corresponding author at : E.F.S. Franche-Comté, 8 Rue du Dr Jean-François Xavier Girod, 25020 Besançon, FRANCE E-mail  address: thomas.cherrier@efs.sante.fr (Thomas CHERRIER) Present address: UMR1098, E.F.S. Franche-Comté, University of Bourgogne-Franche-Comté,  Besançon, France

ORCID ID: 0000-0002-0707-9204

## Abstract

The ingestion  of apoptotic corpses by macrophages,  a process called  efferocytosis,  is a crucial step in  inflammation  resolution since  it  alters  macrophage  phenotype  toward  a pro-resolving profile  to foil  inflammation  and  to favor  tissue  repair.  Up to now,  the  resolving macrophages remain poorly characterized, especially in humans. Global investigations, li ke RNA sequencing,  would be very helpful  to unravel  some features  of these  elusive  cells.  Nonetheless, these  inquiries may be challenging  in  a single-specie  model  since  the  fate  of  ingested  mRNA remains  unknown  and may  hinder  any  subsequent  mRNA  investigations  in  the phagocyte.  A full human  model  consisting of  primary human  neutrophil and  primary human  monocytederived macrophage co-culture was  set  up  several decades  ago  to  mimic in  vitro the efferocytosis  process. However,  to our knowledge,  this  model  has not been characterized  as a suitable model to  perform global mRNA  investigations. Indeed,  the  extent of ingested neutrophil  mRNA  contamination  has not been assessed in  resolving  macrophages.  This  work answers  to this  crucial question.  Indeed,  based on  the  protocols  presented  in  this  article,  we demonstrate  that  neutrophil  mRNA  is  severely  degraded and is not able to cross-contaminate resolving macrophage mRNA, contrary to apoptotic human peripheral blood derived mononuclear  cell  (PBMC) or apoptotic  leukemic  Jurkat  cell  mRNA. Moreover, this  allogenic co-culture system does not favor neither neutrophil activation nor macrophage proinflammatory  cytokine  release.  Collectively, we highlight  that  this  model  of  primary  human neutrophil  and primary  human  monocyte-derived  macrophage  co-culture  is the best model for mRNA investigations  in  human  resolving  macrophages  to help  improving  our knowledge  on these  crucial  cells. Journal Pre-proof

Key  words: human, resolving macrophage,  apoptotic neutrophils, efferocytosis, inflammation  resolution, RNA sequencing

## 1. Introduction

List of  abbreviations : resolving macrophage  (M ), apoptotic  neutrophils  (AN),  monocyte-derived macrophages  (MDM), R Carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE), interferon (IFN), interleukin (IL), Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), tumor necrosis factor (PMA), peripheral blood-derived mononuclear cells (PBMC).

Macrophages  constitute  a heterogeneous  population  of innate  immune  cells.  They  are present in  all  ti ssues and play  a role  in  development, ti ssue  and  metabolic homeostasis,  tissue  repair and host  defence  (1).  They  are  able  to  phagocyte  pathogens,  infected and  dead cells  and  to display  processed antigens  in  association  with  major  histocompatibility class  II  complex  (2). They  also  produce  various  mediators  like  cytokines, chemokines, enzymes,  growth  factors, reactive oxygen intermediates or  lipid mediators. During the  past  several decades,  many macrophage subtypes have been  identified and  characterized based  on  their biological functions, phenotypes,  secretomes,  and  metabolomes.  So far,  two major  distinct  states  have been described  (3, 4):

As  illustrated above,  various stimuli can  induce a  plethora of  phenotypes and  functio ns. Moreover,  macrophages are  highly plastic cells and  these  stimuli can  reprogram  them  by leading to phenotype  and function  switches.  'M1-like'  macrophages  can adopt an 'M2-like' phenotype  with  the  appropriate  stimuli and vice  versa (5).  Despite  considerable advances, some macrophage  phenotypes  remain  poorly  characterized  like resolution-phase  macrophages (M R ).

- - Classically  activated  macrophages  (also called  M1-like)  that exhibits  powerful  anti-microb ial and anti-tumoral activity. They are induced by inflammatory stimuli, such as li popolysaccharide,  TNFα and IFN-γ. - Alternatively activated  macrophages  (also  called  M2-like)  that  have  enhanced  phagocytic abilities, can  promote  tissue  repair  and  possess  pro-angiogenic and  pro-fibrotic properties. They  are generated  in  respond  to certain  cytokines,  such  as IL-4,  IL-10 or IL-13. Thereafter the  M2 state  has  been subdivided  into  four  categories  depending on the  inducing stimuli (3): M2a-like  generated  with IL-4  and  IL-13,  M2b-like  induced by  stimulation with immune complexes  and TLR-agonists,  M2c-like generated  with  glucocorticoids,  TGF-β and IL-10, and M2d-like (or tumor-associated  macrophage  [TAM]-like)  induced  by TLR agonists  through  the adenosine  receptor. Journal Pre-proof

Phagocytosis of  apoptotic corpses,  a  process  called efferocytosis, is a  stimulus inducing profound  phenotypical changes  in  macrophages.  Efferocytosis  gives  birth  to  a  new  type  of macrophage: the M R (6-8).  Efferocytosis is therefore considered as  a  major trigger of inflammation  resolution,  since  it allows  inflammatory  macrophage  reprograming  toward a proresolving  profile  (8). Since  the  end of  the 90s, several  papers have  shed  light  on  some  critical

features  of M R (9-15). For example,  M R  have been demonstrated  to regulate  several innate  and adaptive  immune cells  (16,  17).  However,  most  of  these  studies  were  conducted  in  various mouse  models.  Up  to  now,  data about  human M R  are  quite  sparse,  and  these  cells remain overlooked. Global  approaches like RNA sequencing  may provide crucial  information  on these cells.

An in vitro full human  system  based on the co-culture  of human  primary  apoptotic neutrophils (AN) and primary  monocyte-derived  macrophages  (MDM) was set up several  decades ago and provided  some  features  on human  M R  (9). However,  we do not hitherto  know  if  this  singlespecie model is suitable  for mRNA investigations  like RNA sequencing.  Indeed, mRNA arisen from  human primary apoptotic  neutrophils may  contaminate M R   mRNA.  To  alleviate this issue, macrophages and  apoptotic  bodies  from different species  can  be  mixed to  induce efferocytosis (10).  Nonetheless this method may lead to  some  flaws since interspecies sequence  similarities can  be  high. For  example, mouse  and  human genomes  share  40%  of nucleotide  alignment  (18). A study  has shown  that  the  mapping  of 60 RNA-Sequencing  data sets performed  in  Chinese  hamster versus the human  genome  has a total mapped rate of 22.8% (19).  Moreover, ingestion of  apoptotic bodies  from another specie may  preclude some physiological  mechanisms.  For these reasons, a multi-species  system,  despite presenting  some advantages  for  RNA investigations,  may not represent an optimal  model. Journal Pre-proof

With  this  work, we  answer  to the  crucial  question: can ingested  apoptotic  neutrophil mRNA contaminate macrophage mRNA in a single-specie model, thus precluding further transcriptomic  investigation  in  human  M R ? To achieve  this  goal,  we have  reconstituted  a long been  used model  by co-culturing primary  human  AN with  human  primary  MDM to induce efferocytosis and  human M R generation. We  show  here  that  human primary neutrophils, whether  apoptotic  or  not,  exhibit degraded  mRNA  after  using a  specific cell purifica tio n protocol.  By  Q-PCR, we show that the remaining  amplifiable  neutrophil  mRNA are degraded and  non-detectable, contrary to  PBMC  or  Jurkat  cell  mRNA, after ingestion by  MDM. Moreover,  we confirmed  that  macrophages  are efficiently  reprogramed  by efferocytosis  and that purifying  and mixing  apoptotic  neutrophils  with  allogenic  MDM did not induce  neutrophil activation,  nor inflammatory  macrophage  responses, as previously  shown  (9, 20, 21). Together our data establish  that  this  well-known  co-culture  system  allows  global  mRNA  approaches  to expand our knowledge  of the elusive  human  M R .

<!-- image -->

## 2. Material and Methods

## 2.1. Cell purification  and culture

Leukocyte-platelet  concentrates  and cytapheresis  kits were obtained  from  healthy  volunteers  after informed  consent  signature  (authorization  number  #AC-2015-2408). Samples  were collected  from the  French  Blood  Transfusion Center  (EFS  Bourgogne Franche-Comté,  Besançon,  France)  and processed the same day. Several  blood donors were used during  this  study.

Human  primary  neutrophils were isolated  at  room  temperature  from  50 mL  of  fresh  leukocyteplatelet  concentrates  using  a Ficoll-Paque  density  gradient  (ρ = 1.077 g/mL,  Eurobio)  followed  by sedimentation  in  a 3% dextran solution  (Sigma).  25 mL of undiluted  concentrate  were layered  over 15 mL of Ficoll-Paque  in a 50 mL conical  tube. After  centrifugation  at 900 g , 20 min,  the  red blood cell's  containing layer  was collected  and  washed twice  in  PBS (centrifugation at 300 g , 5min)  and resuspended  in  15 mL of PBS. Cell  suspension  was then diluted  in  a 3% dextran  solution  at a 1:3 ratio.  After  gentle  homogenization,  neutrophils  were allowed  to sediment  for  one hour.  The  upper layer,  containing  neutrophils, was collected  and washed once in  PBS. Red blood cells  were lysed by incubation  of  the  neutrophil pellet in  a hypertonic solution (NH4Cl (0.077 M), EDTA  (0.633 mM), KHCO3 (5 mM)). After  an incubation  of 5 min,  PBS was added (to achieve  50 mL) in order to  stop the reaction. Cells were  centrifuged (300 g , 3  min), and  purified neutrophils were resuspended  in  complete  medium (RPMI  1640-GlutaMAX-HEPES (Gibco),  10%  fetal bovine serum  (Gibco), 1X penicillin/streptomycin  (Thermo-Fisher)  , 1X nonessential  amino  acid (Lonza), 1X Sodium  Pyruvate  (Lonza))   and incubated  at 37°C, 5% CO2. Neutrophils  were further  handled carefully  to avoid  any  mechanical  stress. Journal Pre-proof

Human monocytes were  isolated from fresh cytapheresis kit using a  Ficoll-density gradient followed  by positive  CD14 +  cell  selection  (human  CD14 +  MicroBeads,  Miltenyi).  CD14 +  magnetic separation  was  performed  according  the  manufacturer  recommendations.  Purity  was  assessed by CD14 labelling  by flow  cytometry  and was of at least  98%. CD14 +  monocytes  were resuspended in  complete  medium  (RPMI 1640-GlutaMAX-HEPES  (Gibco),  10% fetal  bovine  serum  (Gibco), 1X  penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo-Fisher), 1X  nonessential amino acid  (Lonza), 1X  Sodium Pyruvate  (Lonza))  with  M-CSF at 50 ng/mL  (Miltenyi)  at a concentration  of one million  cells  per mL. Cells were kept at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 7 days to allow  differentiation  into macrophages  and one volume  of medium  was added at day 3.

Peripheral blood-derived  mononuclear cells (PBMC),  isolated  from  cytapherasis kit  by  FicollPaque  separation,  and Jurkat  cells  were  cultured in  complete  medium (RPMI  1640-GlutaMAXHEPES (Gibco), 10% fetal bovine  serum (Gibco), 1X penicillin/streptomycin  (Thermo-Fisher),  1X nonessential  amino  acid  (Lonza),  1X Sodium  Pyruvate  (Lonza)).  Apoptosis  was induced  in Jurkat cells  by incubation  with  10 µ M  of  Camptothecin  (Sigma,  C9911) for  6 h  and in  PBMC by  X-ray irradiation  (35 Gy,  8 min)  using  a RayCell  CE X-ray irradiator  (Best  Theratronics).

For mixing  experiments, apoptotic  cells  were  harvested,  centrifuged at 300 g , 5 min,  resuspended in  X-Vivo15  (Gibco)  and mixed  with  macrophages  at a 5:1 ratio  for the indicated  period.  MDM, cultured in  a  dedicated  well, were  previously harvested  and  counted  to evaluate  the  number  of apoptotic  cells  required  for  each  experiment. After  6 h  or 24 h,  the  non-engulfed apoptotic  cells were then  removed  by extensive  PBS washes,  and macrophages  were harvested  by scrapping  in  a PBS-10 mM  EDTA  solution  and  further  processed. For LPS stimulation  experiments, apoptotic neutrophils  were removed after 24 h and LPS (Lipopolysaccharides  from Escherichia coli O55:B5, Sigma)  was added in  X-vivo15  medium  to MDM at 100 ng/mL  for 24 h. 2.2. Phenotyping  and phagocytosis test For phenotyping  experiments,  CD14 +  cells  were  seeded in  a 6-well  plate  at  a concentration of  1 million cells  per  mL  in  2.5mL.  After  7 days  of  differentiation, MDM were harvested,  washed  in PBS and  100 000 cells  were  resuspended  in  100 µ L  PBS-3% FCS with  2µ L  of  the  appropriate antibodies  (see table  1). After  15 min  incubation at 4°C in  dark, cells  were  washed  one  time  with PBS, and resuspended  in PBS before flow  cytometry  analysis  (SP6800 Spectral Analyzer,  Sony or LSR Fortessa, Becton Dickinson). Journal Pre-proof

For phagocytosis  experiments,  CD14 +  cells  were seeded in  a 12-well  plate at a concentration  of 1 million cells  per mL  in  1mL.  After  7 days  of  differentiation,  MDM,  cultured  in  a dedicated  well, were counted to evaluate  the number  of neutrophils  required  for each mixing  experiment.  Apoptotic cells were labelled  with  10  µ M  CFSE (Invitrogen,  C34554) for  10 min  at 37°C or with  pHrodo (Thermo-Fisher,  P35372). Reaction  was stopped by complete  medium  addition  (to achieve  50mL), and cells  were centrifuged  at 300 g , 3 min,  resuspended  in  X-vivo15  and  mixed  at a 5:1  ratio  with MDM. MDM were harvested  24 h later  and labelled,  as described  above with  a CD206-BV421 antibody.  Gating  strategy  was specified  in  each  appropriate  experiment.

## 2.3. Viability  assessment

Cells  were harvested  at the indicated  time  point,  and 100 000 cells  were  resuspended  in  100 µ L  of Annexin-V  Binding  Buffer  (BD, 556454), incubated  with  5µ L  of FITC-Annexin-V  (BD, 556419) and  5µL  of  7AAD  (BD,  559925),  for  15  min at  room  temperature in the  dark.  Cells were centrifuged  at 300 g , 5 min  and resuspended  in  100 µ L  of Annexin-V  Binding  Buffer.  Viability  was assessed by flow  cytometry  within  one hour  (SP6800 Spectral  Analyzer, Sony  or LSR  Fortessa, Becton Dickinson).  Gating  strategy  was:  definition  of a SSC vs . FSC gate  &gt; doublet  discriminatio n &gt; Annexin  V-FITC vs . 7AAD dot plot.

Experiments  were conducted  in  a 6-well  plate. At the indicated  time  points,  cells  were  harvested, centrifuged  5 min  at 300 g and the dry pellets  were stored at -80°C, while  awaiting  RNA extraction. RNA  was extracted with NucleoSpin® RNA  Plus kit (Macherey-Nagel) according to manufacturer's instructions. RNA quantity  was  measured  using a  Nanodrop  spectrophotometer (Thermo-Fisher). RNA  quality was  assessed  using an  Experion™ Automated Electrophoresis System  according  to manufacturer's  instructions.

## 2.4. Cytokine measurement  by ELISA Experiments  were conducted  in  a 6-well  plate  containing a final volume  of  2.5 mL  of X-vivo15. Two mL  of supernatants  were collected  at the indicated  time  points  and centrifuged  5 min  at 300 g to remove  any  cells.  Samples  were stored at -80°C while  awaiting  cytokine  measurement. ELISA  were conducted  according  to manufacturer's  instructions  on 100 µ L  of supernatant.  IL-6, TNFα, IL-10 and IL1-β kits  were purchased  from  Biolegend  and TGF-β kit  from  R&amp;D  Systems. Microplates  were read with  a Sunrise  absorbance microplate  reader (Tecan)  at 450 nm and results were normalized  to cell  number. 2.5. RNA quality  and Q-PCR experiments Journal Pre-proof

For Q-PCR experiments,  RNA was first  retrotranscribed  using  RevertAid  H Minus  First  Strand cDNA  Synthesis Kit  with random  primers, according  to  manufacturer's instructions (ThermoFisher,  K1632). 12 µ L  of  RNA template  was engaged  in  each  reverse  transcription reaction.  QPCR experiments  were  then  conducted  on  a CXF96  real-time detection  system  (Biorad)  using either  Taqman  probes ( Elane probes,  Hs00236952\_m1  (Applied  Biosystem) ;  f or  one  reaction:

mastermix:  1µ L of fluo  mix  probe, 10 µ L  of TaqMan Universal  Master Mix II with  UNG (Applied Biosystem),  5 µ L  H2O. DNA template:  4 µ L)  or Sybr Green (SsoAdvanced™  Universal  SYBR® Green  Supermix, (BioRad)  based  probes  ( CD66b , GAPDH MT-ND6 , , IL-6, TNFα, CD3E and TRAC probes, see table  2) (for  one reaction: mastermix:  10µL  of syber  green  Supermix,  0,06 µL of  each  primer  at  100 µ M,  6µ L  H2O and  4µ L  of  DNA  template). GAPDH gene  expression  was used to normalize  results  when necessary.

## 2.6. Elastase assay

Elastase  activity  was assessed by Neutrophil  Elastase  (NE)  Activity  Assay  Kit  (BioVision,  K383100) according  to manufacturer's  instructions.  Briefly,  supernatants  were harvested  at the indicated ti me  points  and centrifuged at 300 g , 5 min  to remove  any cells.  50 µ L  of  cell  culture  supernatant was mixed  with  50 µ L  of  NE substrate  mix.  Fluorescence  was read at 380 nm in  kinetic  mode for 10 min  using  EnVision®  Xcite  Multilabel  Reader (PerkinElmer). 2.7. Statistical  analysis Unless  stated otherwise,  graph  values  are presented  as means  ± standard  deviations,  calculated  on at  least three  independent experiments. Depending on  the  results of  normality tests,  statistica l significance was  determined using two-tailed Student's t-test, one-sample t-test  or  one-way ANOVA test with  a Tukey's  adjustment. Table 1: list  of antibodies Antibodies Supplier CD16-APC Journal Pre-proof

|                |                 | Cat No      |
|----------------|-----------------|-------------|
|                | Miltenyi Biotec | 130-106-763 |
| CD15-FITC      | Sony            | 2109520     |
| PE-CF594-CD14  | BD Biosciences  | 562335      |
| Alexa647-CD163 | BD Biosciences  | 562669      |
| BV421-CD80     | Sony            | 2126110     |
| BB515-CD206    | BD Biosciences  | 564668      |
| PE-hMER        | Sony            | 2438040     |
| BV421-CD206    | BD Biosciences  | 564062      |

Table 2: list  of primers used in Q-PCR experiments

| Target        | Sequence                   | specificity   |
|---------------|----------------------------|---------------|
| CD66b forward | TCAAAGCATTTGCAATCAGC       | human         |
| CD66b reverse | GTGGGCAACTTCACAAAGGT       | human         |
| GAPDH forward | GAA GGT GAA GGT CGG AGT C  | human         |
| GAPDH reverse | GAA GAT GGT GAT GGG ATT TC | human         |
| TNF forward   | AGGACCAGCTAAGAGGGAGA       | human         |
| TNF reverse   | CCCGGATCATGCTTTCAGTG       | human         |
| IL6 forward   | CACTGGCAGAAAACAACCTG       | human         |
| IL6 reverse   | TGGCTTGTTCCTCACTACTCT      | human         |
|               |                            | human         |
|               |                            | human         |
|               |                            | human         |
|               |                            | human         |
|               |                            | human         |
|               |                            | human         |

MT-ND6 forward TGATTGTTAGCGGTGTGGTC MT-ND6 reverse CCACAGCACCAATCCTACCT TRAC forward ATTGCCCCTCTTCTCCCTCT TRAC reverse GCAGTGTTTGGCAGCTCTTC CD3E forward GTTGTCCCCCATCCCAAAGT CD3E reverse GGTGGAGGGAGTAGGGGATT Journal Pre-proof

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Efferocytosis is induced  in a co-culture  of primary  human  apoptotic  neutrophils and primary  human  monocyte-derived  macrophages.

The co-culture  of  AN and MDM was set up several  decades ago (9). Nonetheless,  some protocols, used here, may  slightly  differ  from  those  used in  the  original  articles.  First,  we have  to determine if, in our  hand  and  with our  protocols,  this  model stil l recapitulate key  features. Since  human neutrophils enter  spontaneous  apoptosis in  vitro (22), we first  determined the  optimal ti me  point for the further efferocytosis experiments. Neutrophils were  isolated from leukocyte-platelet concentrates  using  a Ficoll-density gradient  followed by sedimentation  in  a 3% dextran  solution. A purity  of nearly  92% was achieved  using  the method (Supplementary  Fig. 1A). We then analysed their  viability  in  a time  course by flow  cytometry  after  Annexin-V/7AAD  staining  (Fig.  1A). About 30% of freshly  isolated  neutrophils  are apoptotic.  After  13 h in  culture,  this  percentage  raise  up to 77% and it slightly  decreases at the later  time  points.  On the other  hand,  the percentage  of necrotic cells  starts  to increase  at 24 h.  The  optimal  time  point  for  adding  neutrophils to MDM culture  to trigger  efferocytosis  is  at 13 h after  isolation, since  it  exhibits  the  highest  percentage  of  apoptotic neutrophils  (AN) and the lowest  percentage  of necrotic  cells. Journal Pre-proof

We then  determined  the  efferocytosis efficiency in  our  co-culture  system.  Human macrophages were generated  by M-CSF induced  differentiation  of human  primary  CD14 +  cells  during  7 days. MDM phenotype  was verified  by flow  cytometry  using  CD14, CD163, MERTK, CD80 and CD206 labelling to  assess  differentiation efficiency (Supplementary Fig. 1B).  Generated  MDM  were subsequently  co-cultured  with  CFSE-labelled  AN for 6 or 24 h and labelled  with  CD206-BV421 antibody.  Phagocytosis  efficiency  was assessed by flow  cytometry  (Fig.  1B). MDM containing  at least  one  neutrophil was  defined as  CD206 + /CFSE +   cells. After  6  h  of  co-culture, about  64% (±16.7%) of MDM have  ingested  at least  one  neutrophil  and after  24 h,  about  61% (±18%) (Fig. 1C-D). We checked that  MDM viability  is not impacted  in this  co-culture  system  (supplementary Fig.  1C). We also  verified that  AN are efficiently engulfed  and  do not  just  stick  to MDM surface by labelling AN with  pHrodo dye,  a pH-sensitive  dye non-fluorescent  at neutral  pH and brightly fl uorescent  in  acidic  environments.  This  labelling  allows  to discriminate  internalized  AN from  AN bound to the cell  surface.  We obtain  no  statistical difference when  AN are labelled  with  CFSE or with  pHrodo (68.1% ±10.21 at 6 h and 80.03% ± 6.43 at 24 h of MDM were CD206 + /pHrodo +   ;

## Journal Pre-proof

80.13% ±3.8 at 6 h and 81.5% ±6.63 at 24 h of MDM were CD206 + /CFSE + ), indicating  that  AN were engulfed  and  processed into  phagosomes  (Supplementary  Fig.  2A, 2B and 2C). Moreover, these  results  indicate  that  CFSE labelling of  AN allows  the  accurate  assessment  of  phagocytosis efficiency.  These  data collectively  show that  efferocytosis  is efficiently  triggered  in  this  co-culture.

Journal Pre-proof

Figurel

<!-- image -->

Figure  1. Characterization  of  apoptotic  neutrophil/monocyte-derived macrophage  coculture (A) Neutrophil  viability  assessment. Purified  primary neutrophils  were cultured for  the

indicated time. Left panel: Percent of apoptotic (●) and necrotic ( ∎ ) cells were evaluated by flow cytometry  after  Annexin-V-FITC/7AAD labelling. Annexin-V-FITC/7AAD positive cells  were assessed after FSC vs . SSC gating and doublet  discrimination. Values are means ± SD. n= at least  3 independent  experiments. One-way anova  test with  Tukey's  post-test. **: p≤0.01,  ***: p≤0.001. Right panel: representative dot plot of Annexin-V-FITC vs .  7AAD fluorescence  intensities after FSC vs . SSC gating and doublet discrimination. Numbers indicate the percentage of cells in the related quadrant. (B) Time line of our co-culture system. Primary human CD14 +  monocytes were purified and seeded at 1 million cells per mL at day 0 and differentiated with 50 ng/mL of MCSF into macrophage (MDM). At day 6 primary human neutrophils were purified and cultured for 13 h to induce spontaneous apoptosis (AN). At day 7, MDM and apoptotic neutrophils (AN) were mixed at a 1:5 ratio and macrophages were harvested 6 h or 24 h later for further analysis. (C-D) Phagocytosis test. At day 7, AN were labelled with CSFE (10µM) for 10 min at 37°C, mixed with MDM and incubated for the indicated time. Non-engulfed neutrophils were then removed by 5 PBS washes.  MDM  were  subsequently  harvested  by  scrapping  and  labelled  with  CD206-BV421 antibody.  After  FSC vs ; SSC &gt; doublet  discrimination &gt; SSC vs CD206  gating,  MDM  CD206 positive cells that have ingested at least one AN were CFSE + . (C) Representative dot plots of SSC vs .  CFSE fluorescence intensity of CD206 positive cells. Numbers indicate the percentage of cells in  each gate, Representative of 3 independant  experiments. (D) Quantification of phagocytosis tests. Values are means ± SD. n = 3. One-way anova with Tukey's post-hoc test, **: p≤0.01, ns: non-significant .

3.2. Human  primary  neutrophils  contain  less mRNA than MDM and these mRNA are highly  degraded. In order to ensure that neutrophil mRNA  cannot contaminate macrophage mRNA  after efferocytosis, we determined fi rst the  mRNA  quantity  per cell  in  neutrophils and  macrophages. Freshly isolated and  13  h  cultured neutrophils exhibit the same  mRNA  per  cell ratio but macrophages  contain  7.31 fold  more mRNA per cell  (Fig. 2A). We then  analysed  the detectability of  these  mRNA.  We chose  to quantify  by  Q-PCR two highly expressed  mRNA  arisen  from  the nuclear gene GAPDH and the mitochondrial gene MT-ND6 . When normalized to the retrotranscribed mRNA quantity, GAPDH and MT-ND6 mRNA  are respectively  about 7700 and 5600 fold  less detectable  in  AN compared to MDM (Fig. 2B,C). But GAPDH and MT-ND6 mRNA detectability remains  equivalent  in  freshly  isolated  and in  13 h  post-isolation  cultured  neutrophils (Fig.  2B,C).  These  experiments suggest  that  neutrophil mRNA  are degraded even  right  after  cell isolation. Journal Pre-proof

To  test  this  hypothesis, we checked  mRNA  quality using Experion Automated  Electrophoresis System.  Neutrophil mRNA,  whatever  the  time  point  after  neutrophil isolation, exhibits strong smears contrary  to macrophage  mRNA after electrophoresis  (Fig. 2D). Moreover, the RNA quality indicator  (RQI), measured  on a scale from  1 to 10, is  between  1.74 and 2.21 for neutrophil  mRNA depending  on the time  point  and  is  above  9 for  macrophage  mRNA  (Fig.  2E).  This  demonstrates

that  human primary neutrophil mRNA  are  severely degraded  after  isolation according to  our protocol.

Collectively, these  experiments argue  that  human  primary  neutrophils contain less  mRNA  than MDM, and that  these  neutrophil  mRNA  are less detectable  due to extensive  degradation,  even  in freshly  isolated  neutrophils,  after  a purification  based on our protocol.

Figure2

<!-- image -->

Figure  2. Human  primary  neutrophils  exhibit  low  degraded mRNA  content.  (A) Human primary neutrophils contain less mRNA quantity than MDM. Freshly isolated or 13 h post-isolation (PI)  human  primary  neutrophil  and  MDM mRNA  is  isolated  and  quantified  with  NanoDrop spectrophotometer and normalized to cell number. Values are means ± SD. n=3 for neutrophils points and n=4 for MDM.  Two-tailed unpaired t-test. *: p≤0.05, ns: non-significant. (B-C) Human primary neutrophil mRNA is less amplifiable than MDM mRNA. Freshly isolated or 13 h PI human primary neutrophil and MDM  mRNAs were isolated and retrotranscribed into cDNA. NT-ND6 (B) and GAPDH (C) mRNA are then  amplified  by  Q-PCR and  normalized  to  the  mRNA  quantity previously retrotranscribed. Values are means ± SD. n=3 for neutrophils and n=4 for MDM.  Twotailed  unpaired t-test. ****: p≤0.0001, ns: non-significant (D) Human primary neutrophil  mRNA is degraded.  Freshly isolated or 13/24/48h  PI  human primary neutrophil  and MDM  mRNAs were isolated.  Ladder  (L), MDM  and neutrophil  mRNAs were separated  using Experion  Automated Electrophoresis  System.  Picture  is  representative of three independent experiments. (E) Quantification of Experion Automated Electrophoresis experiments. Values are means ± SD. n = 7 for neutrophils and n=4 for MDM. One-way ANOVA with Tukey's post-hoc test. ****: p≤0.0001, ns: non-significant.

## 3.3. Human  primary  neutrophil  specific mRNA are not detectable post-efferocytosis.

During efferocytosis, the  engulfed corpse  is  trapped  in  a  phagosome called efferosome which subsequently  fuse  with  lysosome  leading to  apoptotic  cell  destruction (23).  Nonetheless, to  our knowledge,  the fate of ingested  mRNA during  efferocytosis  remains  unknown.  To investigate  this, we performed  a co-culture  of MDM and AN to induce  efferocytosis.  Six or 24 h later, macrophage mRNA  were  extracted  and  submitted to  Q-PCR analysis  to  detect  two specific mRNAs,  arisen from Elane and CD66b genes,  which  are highly  expressed  in  neutrophils but  not  in  macrophages (24,  25).  As  mentioned in Fig.  1C,  at  least 57% (±15%)  of  MDM  have  engulfed at  l east one apoptotic  neutrophil at  24 h.  However, Elane (Fig.  3A)  and CD66b (Fig.  3B)  mRNA  levels  are comparable  in  MDM co-cultured  or not  with  neutrophils.  Moreover,  we also  checked  the TNFα mRNA  level  in  MDM.  MDM  differentiated with M-CSF express  low  level of TNFα mRNA , whereas  AN contain  large  amount  of  it  (about  90 fold  more  compared  to MDM).  Nonetheless, ingestion  of  AN by MDM did not induce  an increase  of TNFα mRNA level  in  efferocytic MDM (Fig.  3C).  These  data  indicate that  neutrophil mRNA  does not  contaminate  MDM  mRNA  after efferocytosis. Journal Pre-proof

Since  apoptotic  human  PBMC  and  apoptotic  Jurkat  cells  are also  commonly used  as  apoptotic corpse to trigger  efferocytosis,  we investigated  the  fate  of specific  mRNA  expressed  in  these  cells in  efferocytic MDM. We first  assessed that  apoptosis  is efficiently  induced.  Human  PBMC were irradiated  (X-rays)  and  exhibit about 29.4% ± 8.5 of cells  in  apoptosis,  whereas  Jurkat  cells  were treated  with camptothecin and  exhibits about  40%  ± 7.4  of  cells in apoptosis  (Supplementary Fig.3A).  These cells  are efficiently  engulfed  by MDM:  75.1% ± 9.4 of MDM have engulfed  at least one apoptotic  PBMC and 84.6% ± 5.7 of MDM at least  one apoptotic  Jurkat  cell  (Supplementary Fig.3B).  We then measured  by Q-PCR the expression  level  of two specific  T cell  transcripts: CD3E and TRAC mRNA.  Contrary  to specific  AN transcripts,  specific  apoptotic  Jurkat  cell  transcripts were significantly  enriched  in  efferocytic MDM. Specific  apoptotic  PBMC transcripts  were also enriched  in  some  samples  although  not reaching  globally  the  significant  threshold  (Fig.3D).  These results  indicate that  performing transcriptomic  studies  in  MDM post-efferocytosis  with  apoptotic human  PBMC or apoptotic  Jurkat cells  may  be risky  and should  be avoided.

Figure  3. Human  primary  neutrophil  mRNA  are  not  detectable  in  macrophages  after efferocytosis. MDM were co-cultured with or without AN for 6 or 24h. Non-engulfed neutrophils were removed by 5 PBS washing. MDM  were subsequently harvested by scrapping and mRNA was extracted and retrotranscribed into cDNA. Elane mRNA (A) , CD66b mRNA (B) and TNFα mRNA (C) were quantified  by Q-PCR. Results were normalized to GAPDH  expression. Values are means ± SD. n = at least 3 independent experiments (A), n = at least 4 independent experiments (B-C), n = 3 independent experiments. One-way anova with Tukey's post-hoc test. *: p≤0.05, ****: p≤0.0001,  ns: non-significant. (D) Some human primary  Jurkat  and  PBMC mRNA  can  be detected in macrophages after efferocytosis. MDM were co-cultured with or without apoptotic PBMC and apoptotic  Jurkat cells for 24h. Non-engulfed  apoptotic corpses were removed by 5 PBS washing. MDM  were subsequently harvested by scrapping and mRNA was extracted and retrotranscribed into cDNA. TRAC mRNA (Left panel), CD3E mRNA (right panel) were quantified by  Q-PCR. Results were  normalized  to  GAPDH  expression.  Values  are  means ±  SD.  n = 3 independent experiments. Two-tailed unpaired t-test. *: p≤0.05, ns: non significant. Journal Pre-proof 0.20 0.154 MDM

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure3

<!-- image -->

## 3.4. Allogenic apoptotic  neutrophil  and monocyte-derived  macrophage  co-culture  did not induce  cell activation

Since  our co-culture  system  of  MDM and neutrophils  are collected  from  two different  donors, we checked if  this  allogenic  context  did  not artificially  influence  the  activation  status  of  these  cells.

CD66b mRNA

## Journal Pre-proof

We first measured  neutrophil  activation  by  quantifying Elastase  activity in  culture supernatant. Elastase  is  a  specific enzyme  stocked  in  azurophilic  granules of  neutrophils released  upon  cell activation.  Extracellular Elastase  activity is  by the  way  representative  of  the  neutrophil  activatio n state (26). When neutrophils  were activated  by PMA, we observed a strong Elastase  activity  in cell culture supernatant (Fig.  4A).  However,  no  Elastase  activity was  detected  when  MDM  were cultured  alone  neither  after  a 24 h incubation  with  neutrophils  (Fig.  4A).  These  data demonstrate that when  co-cultured with MDM,  activation of  allogenic human primary neutrophils is not triggered.

Then,  we also monitored  the impact  of neutrophils  on MDM activation.  Allogenic  co-culture  may induce  macrophage pro-inflammatory responses.  To  rule out  this possibility, we  quantified by ELISA the amount  of TNFα and IL-6, two pro-inflammatory  cytokines,  in culture  supernatant.  The amount  of  TNFα and  IL6  released  by  MDM  is  comparable,  whether  macrophages  are  cultured alone  or with  allogenic neutrophils (Fig.  4B).  This  imply that  MDM are not  activated  when  coincubated  with  primary  neutrophils. Collectively,  these data emphasize  that allogenic  primary  MDM and primary  neutrophils  co-culture did not  trigger  an artifactual  activation  of any  of these  cells. Journal Pre-proof

Figure  4. Human  primary  neutrophil  and  MDM  co-culture  does  not  induce  allogenic reactions. (A) Human primary neutrophils are not activated by co-culture with MDM.  MDM  are co-cultured with or without AN for 24 h. AN were stimulated with PMA  (100nM, 1 h at 37°C) as a positive control. Elastase activity in cell supernatant was quantified using a fluorimetric test and normalized to 1 million cells.  Values are means ± SD. n = at least 3 independent experiments. Oneway ANOVA  with Tukey's post-hoc test. ****: p≤0.0001. (B-C) MDM-AN  did not induce MDM proinflammatory responses. MDM are co-cultured with or without AN for 24 h. Cell supernatants were collected and centrifuged at 300 g 5 min to remove any cells. IL6 (B) and TNFα (C) proteins were quantified  by ELISA.  Results were normalized to 1 million cells. Values are means ± SD. n = 3. Two-tailed unpaired t-test. ****: p≤0.0001, ns: non-significant. Journal Pre-proof

<!-- image -->

## 3.5  Efferocytosis efficiently reprograms  human  monocyte-derived  macrophages

Quantification of pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion after LPS  stimulation is commonly performed  to assess the  efficiency  of  MDM reprograming  after  efferocytosis  (9).  MDM were cocultured  or not with  AN for  24 h, AN were subsequently  removed  and MDM were stimulated  with LPS for 24 h. We then  measured,  by ELISA,  the release of TNFα in cell  supernatant.  MDM which have  previously  engulfed  AN secrete  2.94 times  less  TNFα compared  to MDM cultured  without AN, demonstrating  that MDM are less prone to Toll  like  receptor 4 stimulation  after  efferocytosis

and  are  therefore reprogramed. We  also  checked  the TNFα mRNA  level to  decipher whether efferocytosis can  affect  or  not TNFα transcription. There  is  no  significant difference in TNFα mRNA level  whether  MDM were previously  co-cultured  or not with  AN, indicating  that the lower released of TNFα  after LPS stimulation post-efferocytosis is not transcription-dependent (Supplementary  Fig.  5).

Figure  5. MDM are efficiently reprogramed by  efferocytosis. MDM  are  co-cultured with or without AN for 24h. AN were then removed by PBS washing and MDM were stimulated with LPS (100 ng/mL for 24 hours). After LPS stimulation, cell supernatants were collected and centrifuged at  300 g ,  5  min  to  remove any  cells. TNFα  proteins were quantified  by  ELISA.  Results were normalized to MDM values for each donor. Values are means ± SD. n = 3. One-sample t-test. **: p≤0.01. 4. Discussion and conclusion Journal Pre-proof

<!-- image -->

In  vitro systems  where  macrophages and  apoptotic  cells are  co-cultured to  study  efferocytosis allowed  to unravel many  features  of  M R , like  identification of  some  murine markers  or  secreted mediators  for example  (9, 14, 27-29). However, up to now, involved  pathways  and comprehensive molecular  changes  induced  by efferocytosis  remain  puzzling  in  mice,  and  even  more  in  humans. Global approaches,  like RNA  sequencing, may  help  to  clear up  some  mechanistic insights. Nonetheless,  these approaches may be impeded by few hurdles  like apoptotic corpses mRNA crosscontamination  or  induced  allogenic immune  reactions.  Some  studies  try  to  alleviate the  risk  of mRNA cross-contamination  by setting  up a model  where  apoptotic  corpses and macrophages  are obtained  from  two different  species  (10, 12). Despite  being  useful,  in  this  model  some  but  not  all

transcripts can be  discriminated due to high sequence similarity, thus precluding part of efferocytosis triggered mRNA  variations (18,  19).  A  two-species  model  may  also  hinder  some physiological  mechanisms  since in the body, a macrophage  only  engulfs  apoptotic  corpses deriving from  its  own  specie.  The  nature  of  the  apoptotic  corpses  employed  is  often  'non  physiological'. Irradiated  Jurkat  T  cells  or  thymocytes are  commonly used as apoptotic  cell  source  (12,  29).  In these  cells,  apoptosis  is  artificially triggered  with  irradiation, and they  do not represent  the main cell  type  engulfed physiologically during the  resolution phase  of  inflammation, which  is  mainly apoptotic  blood-derived  neutrophils. In  this sense,  the  type  of  ingested corpses  and  the  way  to induce  apoptosis  may  influence  the  macrophage  response  (discussed  in  (30)).  If  we  add  the  fact that  human  primary  neutrophils  exhibit  a much  higher  apoptotic  rate, compared  to apoptotic  Jurkat cells  or apoptotic  PBMC, and that apoptosis is triggered  without  chemical  treatment  or irradiatio n, the  use of AN seems preferable.

We shed light  here on the feasibility  of mRNA investigations  in a long been used full  human  model of efferocytosis.  Obviously,  we did not claim  that this  system  perfectly  mimics  the in vivo response. But  so far,  regarding  the  complexity of in vivo i nvestigations in  humans, the  co-culture  of  human AN and MDM is the most  accurate and the closest  possible in vitro system  to reflect  what  occurs in  human  body  at the  resolution phase  of  inflammation.  It  has  also  the  great  advantage  to  allow investigations  in  human  M R , which  is  an overlooked  model  compared  to its  murine  counterpart. In  this system, even  in fresh neutrophils, isolated according to  our  experimental conditions, transcript  amplification  is tricky,  including  for highly  expressed  genes  like GAPDH and MT-ND6 . All  transcripts detected  exhibit a  high cycle  quantification  value  (Cq)  (data  not  shown).  This is surprizing since  many  labs  performed  Q-PCR experiments  and RNAseq  studies  on  fresh  human neutrophils (31, 32). However,  our protocol  is  slightly  different from  their  own.  For instance,  we did not process neutrophils  within  an hour  but within  4-5 hours  after  blood collection,  since  we are working on fresh leukocyte-platelet concentrates. Some  other subtle differences in blood collection,  cell  purification  and  RNA extraction  protocols  may  explain  why  we observe  degraded mRNA in our 'fresh'  neutrophils.  Therefore,  our results  absolutely  do not  challenge  the reliability of previously  published  work on mRNA investigations  in  human  neutrophils.  It just emphases  that this neutrophil purification protocol  is  suitable for  setting up  a  model  of  efferocytosis to  limit neutrophil  mRNA contamination  in  M R , but should  be avoided for mRNA investigations  in human primary  neutrophils. Indeed,  we demonstrate  here  that  AN mRNA  does not  contaminate  MDM Journal Pre-proof

mRNA.  This  absence  of  contamination can  be  due  to  the  low RNA  quantity and  quality in neutrophils after  a purification based on our extraction  protocol.  Even  if  we  did  not  observe  any statistically  significant  increase  of Elane and CD66b mRNA in  MDM after  efferocytosis,  we still can  detect  an  extremely low  background  (Figure 3).  Moreover,  a  highly expressed  mRNA  in neutrophils,  like TNFα mRNA, does not lead to an increase  of basal TNFα mRNA  level  in  MDM post-efferocytosis. Engulfed cells transit via efferosome were  they  are  ultimately degraded, meaning  that  the  low  neutrophil  mRNA quality  is  probably  even  more  altered.  Furthermore,  even if Elane and CD66b mRNA  are  specific of  neutrophils we  can  still occasionally detect  few amplifiable Elane and CD66b transcripts in MDM  cultured alone (Figure 3).  Collectively, considering  the  tremendous  discrepancies  in  mRNA  quality  and quantity  between  AN and MDM, it i s very  unlikely  that the reminiscent Elane and CD66b mRNA levels  reflect  a contamination  with neutrophil  mRNA. On the contrary,  when using  apoptotic  Jurkat cells  or human  apoptotic  PBMC, we were able to detect some T-cell  specific  transcripts  like CD3E and TRAC mRNA in MDM after efferocytosis.  Indeed, these transcripts  are highly  expressed  even  in apoptotic  PBMC and apoptotic Jurkat  T cells,  exhibiting  low quantification  cycle  values  (data not shown),  and are easily  amplified by Q-PCR. In  contrast,  as stated  above, most  neutrophil  transcripts exhibit a  l ow  quantifica tio n cycle values, even with usually highly expressed genes li ke NT-ND6 and GAPDH . The discrepancies  of these Cq values  between PBMC and Jurkat cell,  on one side, and AN, on the other side,  may  reside  in  RNA  quality and  quantity differences and  most  probably  explain why  AN mRNA are not detectable in  efferocytic  macrophages,  contrary  to some PBMC and Jurkat mRNA. This  clearly establishes the  potential risk  of  mRNA  contamination  in  MDM  post-efferocytosis, when using  apoptotic  human  PBMC and apoptotic Jurkat T cells.  Therefore,  we discourage  the use of these cells  as apoptotic  corpse in  any transcriptomic  studies  of efferocytic  MDM. The  use of AN extracted  from  leukocyte-platelet  concentrate  must  be prioritized  for  this  application. Journal Pre-proof

Another  pitfall in this system  may  be the  question of  DNA horizontal transfer. Indeed,  several manuscripts  demonstrate  that  some  portions  of  the  apoptotic  cell  DNA may  be transferred  to  the phagocyte cell, leading to the expression of some apoptotic cell genes and promoting tumorigenesis. These results were  obtained in other cellular models with apoptotic bodies expressing  viral  oncogenes  (Epstein-Barr  virus  or human  papillomavirus) (33, 34). Nonetheless  it seems that DNA transfer  is lost if  it does not  confer  a selective  advantage  to the recipient  cell  (35). In  our  model, even  if we  cannot  completely exclude DNA  transfer during efferocytosis, AN

## Journal Pre-proof

specific transcripts  we  studied  are  not  expressed  in  MDM,  suggesting that  even  if  DNA transfer occur,  it  does not lead  to significant  neutrophil  gene  expression.  Further  experiments  are required to investigate  the potential  occurrence  of DNA transfer,  even  if  it  seems  here unlikely.

The co-culture  system,  used here, was characterized  several  decades ago (9, 21). Nonetheless,  since we  changed some  parameters li ke cell purification methods  (CD14 +   magnetic sorting versus selection  by  adherence…)  or apoptosis  induction  (spontaneous  apoptosis  but not UV-irradiation), we verified  that  in  our hands,  this  model  recapitulates  some previously  characterized  key features: 1)  Efferocytosis is  i nduced  in  this 24 h.  This  suggests that  all Partial lysosomal destruction of  CFSE  may  be  responsible for  this minor positive macrophage  frequency.  Using  pHrodo  labelling  we confirmed a more direct proof of apoptotic  corpse engulfment  when using  apoptotic  cell  CFSE labelling.

3) Macrophages  are efficiently  reprogramed  by efferocytosis  (Figure  5). Indeed efferocytic  MDM are less  prone to release  pro-inflammatory  TNFα upon LPS stimulation.  This  mechanism  seems to be transcription-independent,  since TNFα mRNA level  is not  affected  by  efferocytosis.  Alteratio n of  TLR  signalling may  be involved  in  this  phenomenon,  but  further  experiments are required  to test this  hypothesis.

- model.  At 6 h, most  of  MDM uptake  at least  one neutrophil. Although  non-significant,  we observed  a slight  decrease  of CSFE positive  MDM between  6 and MDM able  to phagocyte  already  reached  satiety  at 6 h  (Figure  1C). decreased  of  CSFE that  AN are internalized and not just  docked at MDM surface.  By the way, the use of an imaging  flow  cytometer  may bring 2) There is no artefactual  cell  activation  in  this  allogenic  co-culture  system.  Indeed human  primary neutrophils are  very fragile and  can  be  activated by  a  simple mechanical stress  for  example. Neutrophil granule release,  containing Elastase  in  particular, may  induce  macrophage  activation (36).  However, we  did  not  observe  any  increase of Elastase activity nor macrophage proinflammatory  cytokine  secretion  in  co-culture  cell  supernatants (Figure  4A-C), thus  ensuring  that this  system  did not  suffer  from  these  pitfalls. Journal Pre-proof

With  this  work, we demonstrated  the superiority  of the AN-MDM co-culture  system  compared  to apoptotic PBMC/apoptotic  Jurkat cells-MDM  and we shed light  on the proof-of-concept  of mRNA investigation  feasibility  in  this  full  human  model  of resolving  macrophage, thus  opening  the  door to a better characterization  of  this  essential  actor in  human  inflammation  resolution.

## Funding

This  work was supported by grants  from  the Agence  Nationale  de la Recherche  (Labex LipSTIC, ANR-11-LABX-0021) and the Région  de Bourgogne  Franche-Comté  (support  to Labex LipSTIC [to PS] 2017 and to obtain  the SH800 cell  sorter [Sony]).  TC received  financial  support from  the Région  de Bourgogne  Franche-Comté  (postdoctoral  fellowship).  MM received  a PhD grant  from the  University  of Bourgogne  Franche-Comté.

## Acknowledgments

We would  like  to thank  all  the  members  of  the  UMR1098 for helpful  and stimulating  discussions and in  particular  Dr. F. Bonnefoy  and Dr. M.Couturier. Competing  and declaration  of interests: The  data  presented  in  this  manuscript are  original, and  have  not  been  published or  submitted elsewhere.  All  listed  authors  have  approved  the  manuscript and  agreed  with  the  submission. In addition,  we declare  no financial  interest  related  to this  work. Journal Pre-proof

<!-- image -->

## Bibliography

- 1. Wynn,  T. A., A. Chawla, and J. W. Pollard. 2013. Macrophage biology in development,  homeostasis and disease. Nature 496: 445-455.
- 2. Arango Duque, G., and A. Descoteaux.  2014. Macrophage cytokines: involvement  in immunity  and infectious diseases. Front. Immunol. 5: 491.
- 3. Shapouri-Moghaddam, A., S. Mohammadian, H. Vazini, M. Taghadosi, S.-A. Esmaeili, F. Mardani, B. Seifi, A. Mohammadi, J. T. Afshari, and A. Sahebkar. 2018. Macrophage plasticity,  polarization, and function  in health  and disease. J. Cell Physiol. 233: 6425-6440.
- 4. Mills, C. D., K. Kincaid, J. M. Alt, M. J. Heilman, and A. M. Hill.  2000. M-1/M-2 macrophages and the Th1/Th2  paradigm. J. Immunol. 164: 6166-6173.
- 5. Davis, M. J., T. M. Tsang,  Y. Qiu, J. K. Dayrit, J. B. Freij, G. B. Huffnagle,  and M. A. Olszewski.  2013. Macrophage M1/M2 polarization  dynamically  adapts to changes in cytokine microenvironments  in Cryptococcus neoformans  infection. MBio 4: e00264-13.
- 6. Elliott, M. R., K. M. Koster, and P. S. Murphy.  2017. Efferocytosis signaling in the regulation  of macrophage inflammatory  responses. J. Immunol. 198: 1387-1394.
- 7. Gordon, S., and A. Plüddemann.  2018. Macrophage clearance of apoptotic cells: A critical assessment. Front. Immunol. 9: 127.
- 8. Szondy,  Z., Z. Sarang, B. Kiss, É. Garabuczi,  and K. Köröskényi. 2017. Antiinflammatory  Mechanisms Triggered by Apoptotic Cells during Their Clearance. Front. Immunol. 8: 909.
- 9. Fadok, V. A., D. L. Bratton,  A. Konowal, P. W. Freed, J. Y. Westcott, and P. M. Henson.  1998. Macrophages that have ingested apoptotic cells in vitro inhibit proinflammatory  cytokine production  through  autocrine/paracrine  mechanisms involving TGF-beta, PGE2, and PAF. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 890-898.
- 10. Morioka, S., J. S. A. Perry, M. H. Raymond,  C. B. Medina, Y.  Zhu,  L. Zhao, V. Serbulea, S. Onengut-Gumuscu,  N. Leitinger, S. Kucenas, J. C. Rathmell,  L. Makowski, and K. S. Ravichandran.  2018. Efferocytosis  induces a novel SLC program to promote glucose uptake and lactate release. Nature 563: 714-718.
- 11. Bonnefoy,  F., T. Gauthier,  R. Vallion, O. Martin-Rodriguez,  A. Missey, A. Daoui, S. Valmary-Degano, P. Saas, M. Couturier,  and S. Perruche. 2018. Factors Produced by Macrophages Eliminating Apoptotic Cells Demonstrate Pro-Resolutive  Properties and Terminate  Ongoing Inflammation. Front. Immunol. 9: 2586.
- 12. Park, D., C. Z. Han, M. R. Elliott,  J. M. Kinchen, P. C. Trampont,  S. Das, S. Collins, J. J. Lysiak, K. L. Hoehn,  and K. S. Ravichandran.  2011. Continued clearance of apoptotic cells critically depends on the phagocyte Ucp2 protein. Nature 477: 220-224. 13. Wang, Y.,  M. Subramanian,  A. Yurdagul,  V. C. Barbosa-Lorenzi,  B. Cai, J. de JuanSanz, T. A. Ryan,  M. Nomura,  F. R. Maxfield,  and I. Tabas. 2017. Mitochondrial  fission promotes the continued  clearance of apoptotic cells by macrophages. Cell 171: 331345.e22.

Journal Pre-proof

- 14. Kourtzelis,  I.,  X. Li, I. Mitroulis, D. Grosser, T. Kajikawa, B. Wang, M. Grzybek,  J. von Renesse, A. Czogalla, M. Troullinaki,  A. Ferreira, C. Doreth, K. Ruppova,  L.-S. Chen, K. Hosur, J.-H.  Lim, K.-J. Chung,  S. Grossklaus,  A. K. Tausche,  L. A. B. Joosten, N. M. Moutsopoulos,  B. Wielockx, A. Castrillo, J. M. Korostoff, Ü. Coskun, G.

Hajishengallis,  and T. Chavakis. 2019. DEL-1 promotes macrophage efferocytosis and clearance of inflammation. Nat. Immunol. 20: 40-49. 15. Zhang,  S., S. Weinberg, M. DeBerge, A. Gainullina,  M. Schipma, J. M. Kinchen,  I. Ben-Sahra, D. R. Gius, L. Yvan-Charvet,  N. S. Chandel, P. T. Schumacker, and E. B. Thorp.  2019. Efferocytosis fuels  requirements of fatty  acid oxidation and the electron transport  chain to polarize macrophages for tissue repair. Cell Metab. 29: 443-456.e5. 16. Bonnefoy,  F., S. Perruche,  M. Couturier,  A. Sedrati, Y. Sun,  P. Tiberghien,  B. Gaugler,  and P. Saas. 2011. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells play a major role in apoptotic leukocyte-induced  immune  modulation. J. Immunol. 186: 5696-5705. 17. Kleinclauss,  F., S. Perruche,  E. Masson, M. de Carvalho  Bittencourt,  S. Biichle, J. P. Remy-Martin,  C. Ferrand, M. Martin,  H. Bittard, J. M. Chalopin, E. Seilles, P. Tiberghien, and P. Saas. 2006. Intravenous  apoptotic spleen cell infusion  induces a TGF-betadependent regulatory  T-cell expansion. Cell Death Differ. 13: 41-52. 18. Mouse Genome Sequencing Consortium, R. H. Waterston, K. Lindblad-Toh,  E. Birney, J. Rogers, J. F. Abril, P. Agarwal, R. Agarwala, R. Ainscough,  M. Alexandersson, P. An, S. E. Antonarakis,  J. Attwood, R. Baertsch, J. Bailey, K. Barlow, S. Beck, E. Berry, B. Birren, T. Bloom, P. Bork, M. Botcherby,  N. Bray, M. R. Brent,  D. G. Brown, S. D. Brown,  C. Bult,  J. Burton,  J. Butler, R. D. Campbell, P. Carninci, S. Cawley,  F. Chiaromonte,  A. T. Chinwalla,  D. M. Church,  M. Clamp, C. Clee, F. S. Collins, L. L. Cook, R. R. Copley, A. Coulson,  O. Couronne,  J. Cuff, V. Curwen,  T. Cutts, M. Daly, R. David, J. Davies, K. D. Delehaunty,  J. Deri, E. T. Dermitzakis, C. Dewey, N. J. Dickens, M. Diekhans, S. Dodge, I.  Dubchak, D. M. Dunn,  S. R. Eddy, L. Elnitski, R. D. Emes, P. Eswara, E. Eyras, A. Felsenfeld,  G. A. Fewell, P. Flicek, K. Foley, W. N. Frankel,  L. A. Fulton,  R. S. Fulton,  T. S. Furey,  D. Gage, R. A. Gibbs, G. Glusman,  S. Gnerre,  N. Goldman, L. Goodstadt, D. Grafham,  T. A. Graves,  E. D. Green, S. Gregory, R. Guigó, M. Guyer,  R. C. Hardison, D. Haussler,  Y.  Hayashizaki,  L. W. Hillier, A. Hinrichs,  W. Hlavina,  T. Holzer,  F. Hsu, A. Hua, T. Hubbard, A. Hunt,  I.  Jackson, D. B. Jaffe, L. S. Johnson,  M. Jones, T. A. Jones, A. Joy, M. Kamal, E. K. Karlsson, D. Karolchik, A. Kasprzyk,  J. Kawai, E. Keibler, C. Kells, W. J. Kent, A. Kirby, D. L. Kolbe, I.  Korf, R. S. Kucherlapati,  E. J. Kulbokas, D. Kulp, T. Landers, J. P. Leger, S. Leonard, I.  Letunic, R. Levine, J. Li, M. Li, C. Lloyd,  S. Lucas, B. Ma, D. R. Maglott,  E. R. Mardis, L. Matthews, E. Mauceli, J. H. Mayer, M. McCarthy,  W. R. McCombie, S. McLaren,  K. McLay, J. D. McPherson, J. Meldrim, B. Meredith, J. P. Mesirov, W. Miller, T. L. Miner, E. Mongin, K. T. Montgomery,  M. Morgan, R. Mott, J. C. Mullikin,  D. M. Muzny,  W. E. Nash,  J. O. Nelson,  M. N. Nhan,  R. Nicol, Z. Ning, C. Nusbaum,  M. J. O'Connor, Y.  Okazaki, K. Oliver,  E. Overton-Larty,  L. Pachter, G. Parra, K. H. Pepin, J. Peterson, P. Pevzner,  R. Plumb, C. S. Pohl, A. Poliakov, T. C. Ponce, C. P. Ponting, S. Potter, M. Quail,  A. Reymond, B. A. Roe, K. M. Roskin, E. M. Rubin,  A. G. Rust,  R. Santos, V. Sapojnikov, B. Schultz,  J. Schultz,  M. S. Schwartz,  S. Schwartz,  C. Scott, S. Seaman, S. Searle, T. Sharpe, A. Sheridan, R. Shownkeen,  S. Sims, J. B. Singer, G. Slater, A. Smit, D. R. Smith, B. Spencer, A. Stabenau,  N. Stange-Thomann,  C. Sugnet,  M. Suyama,  G. Tesler, J. Thompson,  D. Torrents,  E. Trevaskis,  J. Tromp, C. Ucla, A. Ureta-Vidal, and et al. 2002. Initial  sequencing and comparative analysis of the mouse genome. Nature 420: 520-562. Journal Pre-proof

19. Le, H., C. Chen, and C. T. Goudar. 2015. An evaluation  of public genomic references for mapping RNA-Seq data from Chinese hamster  ovary cells. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 112: 2412-2416.

- 20. Huynh,  M.-L. N., V. A. Fadok, and P. M. Henson.  2002. Phosphatidylserinedependent ingestion of apoptotic cells promotes TGF-beta1 secretion and the resolution of inflammation. J. Clin. Invest. 109: 41-50.
- 21. Fadok, V. A., D. L. Bratton, L. Guthrie,  and P. M. Henson.  2001. Differential effects of apoptotic versus  lysed cells on macrophage production of cytokines: role of proteases. J. Immunol. 166: 6847-6854.
- 22. Akgul, C., D. A. Moulding, and S. W. Edwards. 2001. Molecular  control of neutrophil apoptosis. FEBS Lett. 487: 318-322.
- 23. Martin, C. J., K. N. Peters, and S. M. Behar. 2014. Macrophages clean up: efferocytosis and microbial control. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 17: 17-23.
- 24. Amanzada, A., I. A. Malik, M. Nischwitz,  S. Sultan,  N. Naz,  and G. Ramadori. 2011. Myeloperoxidase and elastase are only  expressed by neutrophils  in normal  and in inflamed liver. Histochem. Cell Biol. 135: 305-315.
- 32. Tutino,  V. M., K. E. Poppenberg, K. Jiang, J. N. Jarvis, Y.  Sun, A. Sonig, A. H. Siddiqui, K. V. Snyder,  E. I.  Levy, J. Kolega, and H. Meng. 2018. Circulating neutrophil transcriptome may reveal intracranial  aneurysm  signature. PLoS One 13: e0191407. 33. Bergsmedh, A., A. Szeles, M. Henriksson,  A. Bratt, M. J. Folkman, A. L. Spetz, and L. Holmgren.  2001. Horizontal  transfer  of oncogenes by uptake of apoptotic bodies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98: 6407-6411.
- 25. Lakschevitz,  F. S., S. Hassanpour,  A. Rubin,  N. Fine, C. Sun, and M. Glogauer. 2016. Identification  of neutrophil  surface marker changes in health  and inflammation using high-throughput  screening flow cytometry. Exp. Cell Res. 342: 200-209. 26. Lominadze, G., D. W. Powell, G. C. Luerman,  A. J. Link, R. A. Ward, and K. R. McLeish. 2005. Proteomic analysis of human  neutrophil  granules. Mol. Cell Proteomics 4: 1503-1521. 27. Odaka, C., T. Mizuochi,  J. Yang,  and A. Ding. 2003. Murine macrophages produce secretory leukocyte  protease inhibitor during clearance of apoptotic cells: implications for resolution  of the inflammatory  response. J. Immunol. 171: 1507-1514. 28. Dalli, J., and C. N. Serhan.  2012. Specific lipid mediator signatures  of human phagocytes:  microparticles stimulate macrophage efferocytosis and pro-resolving mediators. Blood 120: e60-72. 29. Luciani, M. F., and G. Chimini. 1996. The ATP binding cassette transporter  ABC1, is required for the engulfment  of corpses generated by apoptotic cell death. EMBO J. 15: 226-235. 30. Saas, P., E. Daguindau, and S. Perruche.  2016. Concise Review:  Apoptotic CellBased Therapies -Rationale,  Preclinical Results  and Future Clinical Developments. Stem Cells . 31. Jiang, K., X. Sun,  Y. Chen,  Y. Shen, and J. N. Jarvis. 2015. RNA sequencing  from human neutrophils  reveals distinct transcriptional  differences associated with chronic inflammatory  states. BMC Med. Genomics 8: 55. Journal Pre-proof
- 34. Holmgren,  L., A. Szeles, E. Rajnavölgyi,  J. Folkman, G. Klein, I. Ernberg, and K. I. Falk. 1999. Horizontal  transfer  of DNA by the uptake of apoptotic bodies. Blood 93: 3956-3963.
- 35. Yan,  B., H. Wang, F. Li, and C. Y. Li. 2006. Regulation  of mammalian horizontal gene transfer  by apoptotic DNA fragmentation. Br. J. Cancer 95: 1696-1700.

36. Jaffray,  C. 2000. Specific pancreatic enzymes  activate macrophages to produce tumor necrosis factor-alpha:  role of nuclear  factor kappa B and inhibitory kappa B proteins,. J. Gastrointest. Surg. 4: 370-378.

<!-- image -->

## HIGHLIGHTS

- 1. Resolving macrophages are an essential switch regulating  inflammation
- 2. They arose from the engulfment  of apoptotic bodies, a process called efferocytosis
- 3. But resolving  macrophages are not well  characterized, especially  in humans
- 4. Ingested RNA may pollute macrophage RNA, precluding RNA based investigations
- 5. We show that a previously described human model is suitable for resolving macrophage RNA studies

<!-- image -->