1234567890():,;

1234567890():,;

## Inhibition of neutrophil swarming by type I interferon promotes intracellular bacterial

evasion

Received: 10 November 2023

Accepted: 27 September 2024

Check for updates

Shimin Li , Qi Yao , Jiajia Li , Haoxiang Yang 1 2 2 3 , Rui Qian , Meijuan Zheng , 4 4 Ning Wu 5 , Hongyuan Jiang 3 , Lu Li 1,6 &amp; Zhutian Zeng 1,2,6

Listeria monocytogenes (LM) possesses the ability to breach multiple barriers andelicit intricate immune responses. However, there remains a lack of explicit understanding regarding how LM evades innate immune surveillance within the body. Here, we utilized liver intravital imaging to elucidate the dynamic process of LM during infection in the liver. We discovered that LM can rapidly escape from Kupffer cells (KCs) through listeriolysin O (LLO) and proliferate within hepatocytes. Upon LM exposure to the hepatic sinusoids, neutrophils rapidly aggregate at the site of infection. Subsequently, LM can induce type I interferon (IFN-I) production primarily in the spleen, which acts systemically on neutrophils to hamper their swarming by deactivating the ERK pathway, thus evading neutrophil-mediated eradication. Furthermore, our /uniFB01 ndings suggest that virus-induced IFN-I suppresses neutrophil swarming, and COVID-19 patients exhibit impaired neutrophil aggregation function. In conclusion, our /uniFB01 ndings provide compelling evidence demonstrating that intracellular bacteria represented by LM can hijack host defense mechanisms against viral infections to evade immune surveillance. Additionally, impaired neutrophil swarming caused by IFN-I is one of the signi /uniFB01 cant factors contributing to the increased susceptibility to bacterial infections following viral infections.

<!-- image -->

Listeria monocytogenes (LM) is a gram-positive intracellular bacterium and a foodborne pathogen that can trigger both systemic innate and adaptive immune responses upon infection 1 . It serves as a valuable model bacterium for studying immune responses to bacterial infections due to its ability to penetrate host barriers and survive intracellularly. While the interaction mechanisms between LM and host cells have been well understood at the cellular level , in vitro systems 2 are often too simplistic to capture the complexity of in vivo infections. Consequently, there is still a lack of clear understanding regarding the

dynamicchanges that occur during LM in vivo infection, particularly in terms of how LM evades pursuit and containment by various cells of the innate immune system.

Liver resident macrophages, known as Kupffer cells (KCs), are responsible for capturing LM in the blood . LM employs a variety of 3 mechanismstoescapefrommacrophagesduringinvitroinfection.For instance, it utilizes LLO (Listeriolysin O) to perforate the phagosomal membrane, enabling its escape into the cytoplasm. Once inside the cytoplasm, LM relies on ActA to facilitate its cell-to-cell spread 4,5 .

1 Department of Oncology, The First Af /uniFB01 liated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. 2 Key Laboratory of Immune Response and Immunotherapy, Center for Advanced Interdisciplinary Science and Biomedicine of IHM, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. 3 CAS Key Laboratory of Mechanical Behavior and Design of Materials, Department of Modern Mechanics, CAS Center for Excellence in Complex System Mechanics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. 4 Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Af /uniFB01 liated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. 5 The First Af /uniFB01 liated Hospital of Anhui Medical University and Institute of Clinical Immunology Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. 6 These authors jointly supervised this work: Lu Li, Zhutian Zeng. e-mail: lilu@ustc.edu.cn; zengzt@ustc.edu.cn

However, in contrast to an environment composed solely of macrophages in vitro, the body contains numerous parenchymal cells that have a limited capacity to defend against bacterial infections, such as hepatocytes. Therefore, the mechanisms by which LM evades KCs need to be further investigated. Furthermore, although other innate immune cells, such as neutrophils, have been reported to be recruited to infected tissues during LM infection, the mechanisms of their interaction with LM remain unclear . Neutrophils play a signi 6 /uniFB01 cant role in the rapid response to microbial infections . Recent advancements in 7 intravital imaging techniques have improved our understanding of neutrophils. Neutrophils that in /uniFB01 ltrate local tissue can be activated by stimuli from pathogens or dead cell debris, leading to neutrophil swarming 8 , where neutrophils activate and aggregate to engulf pathogens and promote their clearance . Therefore, it is essential to 9 rede /uniFB01 ne the role and mechanisms by which neutrophils contribute to resistance against LM infection.

Type I interferons (IFN-I) are a subset of interferon proteins that play a crucial role in modulating both innate and adaptive immune responses during viral and bacterial infections 10 12 -. Previous studies have reported that IFN-I impairs the clearance of intracellular bacteria, such as LM 13 , Mycobacterium tuberculosis 14 , and Francisella tularensis 15 . Mechanistically, IFN-I suppresses phagosome maturation and the proteolysis of LM virulence factors ActA and LLO through IFITM3, promoting phagosome escape and cell-to-cell spread 16,17 . It also inhibits the activation of phagocytes by downregulating IFNγ receptor expression 18 . While some studies have reported that IFN-I negatively regulates chemokine signaling and modulates neutrophil recruitment 19,20 , it remains elusive whether and how IFN-I directly affects neutrophil behavior and function 21 .

Almost all viral infections induce an upregulation of IFN-I expression and IFN-I is the main effector cytokine of the host immune response against viral infections 11 . It has been reported that several viruses can promote secondary bacterial infections 22,23 . These intracellular bacteria, like viruses, undergo cytoplasmic growth processes, and they also induce the expression of IFN-I through intracellular pathways . Therefore, we speculate that intracellular bacterial 11 infections can create an environment similar to viral infections, to someextent,therebyhelpingthemevadeimmunesurveillance.Hence, elucidating the mechanisms by which intracellular bacteria evade immune surveillance may help uncover the mystery of how viral infections promote secondary bacterial infections.

In this study, we utilized intravital imaging to provide a comprehensive description of the infection process of LM in the liver. Our /uniFB01 ndings demonstrate that LM employs LLO to perforate the KC membrane, allowing it to escape back into the liver sinusoids, rather than relying on ActA for cell-to-cell dissemination. Subsequently, the LM that infects hepatic parenchymal cells undergoes signi /uniFB01 cant ampli /uniFB01 cation under the protection of these cells. Notably, the partial death of KCs resulting from membrane perforation does not trigger neutrophil swarming. Only after hepatocyte lysis, when LM is exposed to the hepatic sinusoids and continuously stimulates neutrophils, can it eventually induce neutrophil swarming. However, our research has revealed that LM-induced IFN-I in the spleen has the capability to suppress neutrophil swarming by deactivating the ERK pathway, thereby aiding LM in evading the detrimental effects of neutrophils. Furthermore, we observed that the detrimental effect of IFN-I on neutrophils plays a role in virus-induced secondary bacterial infections.

## Results

## LMescapesfromKCsbyrelyingonLLO-mediatedperforation of the cell membrane

To investigate how LM evades the innate immune system in vivo, we initially examined the organ distribution following LM infection. Consistent with previous reports, more than 90% of LM was sequestered in the liver (Fig. 1a). KCs play a pivotal role in /uniFB01 ltering pathogens

from the bloodstream 24 . Through time-lapse imaging, we observed rapid uptake of LM almost exclusively by F4/80 + KCs (Fig. 1b), con/uniFB01 rming the important role of KCs in /uniFB01 ltering circulating LM. Despite the retention of LM within KCs at 90 min post-infection, we observed KCs being stained with PI (propidium iodide), a cell impermeable DNA dye, indicating that the cell membrane of KCs had been damaged (Fig. 1c and Movie S1). Subsequently, we found that LM escaped from these damaged KCs and re-entered the hepatic sinus rather than infecting neighboring cells (Fig. 1c and Movie S1). Previous studies suggested that LM spreads between neighboring cells in an ActAdependent manner in vitro . However, upon ActA-de 4 /uniFB01 cient LM (LMΔ actA ) infection, we still observed damage of KC cell membranes at 90min and subsequent escape and re-entry of LM into the hepatic sinus, consistent with wild-type (WT) LM (Fig. 1d and Movie S1). LLO plays an important role in the escape of LM from the lysosome to the cytoplasm 2 , thus we wondered whether LLO is involved in the escape of LM to the extracellular space. LLO-de /uniFB01 cient LM (LMΔ hly ) infection did not cause damage to the cell membrane of KCs, as indicated by the absence of PI staining. Additionally, LMΔ hly was unable to escape from KCs throughout the period of observation (Fig. 1e and Movie S1). In line with these /uniFB01 ndings, LLO de /uniFB01 ciency rendered LM susceptible to rapid clearance in the liver, while ActA de /uniFB01 ciency did not signi /uniFB01 cantly impact the infectivity of LM (Fig. 1f). In summary, these results indicate that during in vivo infections, LM relies on LLO-mediated perforation of KC membranes for escape and dissemination.

## Neutrophil swarming is indispensable for controlling the early spread of LM

Neutrophils are an essential component of the host s innate immune ' defense against bacteria, and previous reports have indicated that neutrophils are rapidly recruited to the infected tissues after LM infection . Therefore, we wondered how neutrophils play a role in LM 6 infection in the liver. We observed that escaped LM started infecting hepatocytes and proliferated extensively within them at 6 h postinfection. Notably, despite neutrophils being recruited to the liver at this time, they were unable to detect the presence of LM hiding within the hepatocytes (Fig. 2a and Movie S2). On the other hand, consistent with the previous study, LM infection resulted in the death of KCs 25 , and we observed the formation of transient neutrophil aggregates around the fragmented dead KCs (Fig. 2a and Movie S2). Although cell death can induce neutrophil swarming, it has been reported that tissue-resident macrophages can shield small wounds to terminate neutrophil swarming, preventing unnecessary tissue damage 26 . Subsequent imaging revealed that extensive LM proliferation led to hepatocyte lysis, exposing LM again in the hepatic sinus, which caused rapid neutrophil aggregation at the site of infection (Fig. 2b and Movie S3). In summary, taking advantage of liver intravital imaging, we delineated the early stages of LM infection, which involve initial capture by KCs, subsequent escape from KCs and infection of hepatocytes, and ultimately, hepatocyte lysis and induction of neutrophil swarming (Fig. 2c).

To further investigate whether neutrophil swarming is involved in the clearance of intracellular bacteria, we compared LM infection with that of extracellular bacterial strain Staphylococcus aureus MW2 or uropathogenic Escherichia coli CFT073. MW2 and CFT073 were also primarily captured by KCs during infection (Supplementary Fig. 1a -d) and induced neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration into the liver, but they failed to elicit neutrophil swarming (Fig. 2d). Consistently, the depletion of neutrophils aggravates the LM infection, but does not affect the MW2 or CFT073 infection (Fig. 2e -g). In addition, inhibiting neutrophil swarming by Zileuton (Fig. 2h, i), an inhibitor of the enzyme 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) involved in leukotriene B4 (LTB4) synthesis, exacerbates LM infection (Fig. 2j). In conclusion, these results suggest that the activation and formation of neutrophil swarming play a role in restricting LM infection.

c

Fig. 1 | LM escapes from KCs by relying on LLO-mediated perforation of the cell membrane.a WTmicewereintravenouslyinfectedwith1 × 10 8 CFUofLM-GFP.The bacterial load in the liver, spleen, lung, and kidney was assessed 30 min postinfection. Data were from three mice. ( P &lt;0.0001). b Intravital images showing the capture of LM in the liver. APC anti-F4/80-labeled KCs (blue) and LM-GFP (green). Captured LM are indicated by yellow arrows. Scale bar, 50 μ m. c -e Mice were infected with 1 × 10 8 CFU of the indicated LM strains intravenously. Dynamic

<!-- image -->

intravital images showing the escape of LM-GFP ( c ), LMΔ actA -GFP ( d ), and LMΔ hly -GFP ( e ) from KCs. APC anti-F4/80-labeled KCs (blue), bacteria (green), and nucleic acid staining dye PI (red) are shown. Escaped LM are indicated by yellow arrows. Scale bar, 25 μ m. f Mice were intravenously infected with 1 × 10 8 CFUofLMGFP, LMΔ actA -GFP or LMΔ hly -GFP. The bacterial load in the liver was assessed 48hpost-infection. Data were from three mice in each group. Data are represented as mean± SEM; *** P &lt;0.001; ns no signi /uniFB01 cance.

Next, we aim to explore how neutrophil swarming limits LM infection. Time-lapse intravital imaging revealed intimate contacts between congregated neutrophils and LM at the infectious foci. Although distinguishing the dynamic process of bacterial capture by a single neutrophil was literally impossible, we noticed that some LM exhibited substantial motility inside neutrophil aggregates, suggesting that they were internalized by migrating neutrophils (Movie S3). This was con /uniFB01 rmed by /uniFB02 ow cytometric analysis showing that a proportion of neutrophils in the liver but not the blood had phagocytosed LM (Supplementary Fig. 2a). In line with this, live-cell imaging indicated that neutrophils can actively take up LM in vitro, and this process did not cause cell lysis in neutrophils as observed for KCs (Supplementary Fig. 2b). The production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is crucial for neutrophil-mediated bacterial killing upon phagocytosis 27 . Accordingly, we observed a signi /uniFB01 cant upregulation of ROS production in neutrophils from the liver of LM-infected mice (Supplementary Fig. 2c), as well as in bone marrow neutrophils stimulated with LM in vitro (Supplementary Fig. 2d). Moreover, treatment of mice with Setanaxib, a selective inhibitor of the NADPH oxidase 1 and 4 (NOX1/4) that drive ROS production 28 , exacerbated LM replication in the liver (Supplementary Fig. 2e). Notably, neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), which represent an effective anti-microbial activity of neutrophils that is

primarily triggered by ROS 29 , were not detected at sites of neutrophil swarming (Supplementary Fig. 2f). Consistently, pharmacological inhibition of or genetic de /uniFB01 ciency in peptidylarginine deiminase 4 (PAD4), which is required for NETs production 30 , did not impact hepatic burden of LM (Supplementary Fig. 2g, h). These data collectively suggest that neutrophils swarmed towards the infectious foci, phagocytosed LM that escaped from dying hepatocytes and killed LM in a ROS-dependent but NETs-independent manner.

In addition to direct microbial killing, neutrophil swarming may help con /uniFB01 ne the spread of LM by causing bystander death of uninfected hepatocytes. In the mT/mG reporter mice which ubiquitously express tdTomato on the cell membrane, we serendipitously found that neutrophils had no discernable tdTomato expression compared to hepatocytes in our intravital imaging settings (Supplementary Fig. 3a). This allowed us to dynamically visualize and distinguish the death of hepatocytes at sites of neutrophil aggregates. Our results showed that both LM-infected and adjacent uninfected hepatocytes underwentrapidmembranerupture(SupplementaryFig.3b),con /uniFB01 rmingthe bystander cytotoxic effects mediated by neutrophil swarming. Consequently, damaged liver parenchymal areas largely overlapped with neutrophil clusters and extended well beyond LM-infected hepatocytes at 24h post-infection. Depletion of neutrophils remarkably

c

Fig. 2 | Neutrophil swarming is indispensable for controlling the early spread of LM.a Dynamicintravital images showing the distribution of LM and the behavior of neutrophils in the liver 6 h post-infection. Mice were infected with 1 × 10 8 CFU LMGFP intravenously. APC anti-F4/80-labeled KCs (blue), PE anti-Ly6G-labeled neutrophils (purple), and LM-GFP (green) are shown. Yellow arrows indicate LM within hepatocytes. Yellow dashed lines indicate infected hepatocytes. White dashed lines indicate debris of KC. Scale bar, 50 μ m. The experiment was repeated three times. b Dynamic intravital images showing the localization of LM and the behavior of neutrophils in the liver 16 h post-infection. Mice were infected with 1 × 10 6 CFULMGFP intravenously. PE anti-Ly6G-labeled neutrophils (purple) and LM-GFP (green) are shown. Scale bar, 50 μ m. The experiment was repeated three times. c Depiction of the LM infection process in the liver during the initial 24 h. d Representative intravital images showing the distribution of neutrophils in the liver 24 h post-

<!-- image -->

0

0

infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP, 5 × 10 7 CFU MW2-GFP, or 5 × 10 CFU CFT-0737 GFP. Scale bar, 100 μ m. The experiment was repeated twice. e g -Mice were treated with either iso or α -Ly6G 12 h prior to infections. Bacteria load in the liver was assessed at e 48h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP ( P =0.0446), 24 h postinfection with f 5 × 10 7 CFU MW2-GFP or g 5 × 10 7 CFU CFT-073-GFP. Each dot represents a mouse. Data were from 3 to 4 mice in each group. h j -Mice were treated with vehicle control or Zileuton (50 mg/kg). h Representative intravital images showing neutrophil cluster size in the liver 24 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Scale bar, 200 μ m. i Quanti /uniFB01 cation of neutrophil cluster size, with each dot representing an infection focus. Data were from three mice in each group. ( P &lt;0.0001). j Bacterial load in the liver was assessed at 48 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFULM-GFP.Datawerefrom /uniFB01 ve mice in each group. ( P =0.0253). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. * P &lt;0.05; ** P &lt;0.01; *** P &lt;0.001; ns no signi /uniFB01 cance.

d

Fig. 3 | Increased resistance to LM infection in splenectomized mice is associated with enhanced neutrophil swarming. a -c Mice were subjected to sham surgeryorunderwentSpX. a Representative intravital images depicting the LM load in the liver at 24 h, 48 h ( P &lt;0.0001), and 72 h ( P &lt;0.0001) post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Scale bar, 200 μ m. b Bacterial load in the liver was assessed at 24h, 48 h ( P =0.0079), and 72 h ( P &lt;0.0001) post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LMGFP. Data from the 24-h group were from ten mice in each group. Data for the 48 h group were from four mice in each group. Data for the 72 h group were from 9 (control) or 12 (SpX) mice. c The survival of mice infected with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP is shown. Data were from /uniFB01 ve mice in each group. ( P &lt;0.0001). d g -Mice were subjected to sham surgery or underwent SpX. d Representative intravital images showingneutrophilclustersin the liver24 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFULM-GFP.

<!-- image -->

Scale bar, 100 μ m. e Quanti /uniFB01 cation of the size of neutrophil clusters, with each dot representing an infection focus. Data were from 3 to 5 mice in each group. ( P &lt;0.0001). f Dynamic intravital images showing neutrophil swarming in the liver 24h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Scale bar, 100 μ m. g Quanti /uniFB01 cation of the number of neutrophils in the liver 24 h ( P =0.0004) and 48h ( P =0.0023) postinfection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Data were from /uniFB01 ve mice in each group. h Normalized mRNAlevelsof Ifnα ( P =0.0357)and Ifnβ ( P =0.0357)intheliverand spleen at 24 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFULM-GFP.Datawerefrom 3to5 mice in each group. i Quanti /uniFB01 cation of serum levels of IFNα ( P =0.0369; P =0.0031) and IFNβ ( P =0.0001) at 24 h and 48 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Data were from /uniFB01 ve mice in each group. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. * P &lt;0.05; ** P &lt;0.01; *** P &lt;0.001; ns no signi /uniFB01 cance.

diminished the size of the injury but also led to unrestricted growth of LM in these regions (Supplementary Fig. 3c, d). Therefore, neutrophil swarming may contribute to LM control by disrupting the cellular microenvironment supporting bacterial replication, albeit at the cost of aggravated collateral tissue damage.

## Increased resistance to LM infection in splenectomized mice is associated with enhanced neutrophil swarming

Although neutrophil swarming limited LM infection, all mice still died of uncontrollable bacterial growth 3 -4 days after infection (Fig. 3a -c), suggesting that they were unable to halt the progression of LM infection. Previous studies have shown that splenectomized (SpX) mice exhibited increased resistance to LM infection 31 . Consistently, we observed improved survival and bacterial control in SpX mice compared to WT mice during LM infection (Fig. 3a -c). This has been attributed to the increased capacity of macrophages in LM clearance 32 . However, we observed that the difference in bacterial clearance became apparent 24 h after infection (Fig. 3b), a time point when LM had already evaded KCs, rendering them ineffective in eliminating LM. Even though we depleted KCs using clodronate liposomes, SpX mice still demonstrated better clearance of LM than sham control mice (Supplementary Fig. 4a, b). Instead, our results indicate that neutrophil responses were closely associated with the enhanced control of LM in SpX mice. At 6 h after infection, neutrophil numbers were comparable

in SpX and WT mice, suggesting that the ability of neutrophils to migrate from the periphery into tissues remained intact (Supplementary Fig. 4c, d). However, neutrophil clusters in the liver of SpX mice were larger than those in the control group at 24 h post-infection (Fig. 3d, e). At this time, neutrophil swarming in the WT mice was already halted. In contrast, neutrophils in SpX mice continued to swarm towards the infection foci, resulting in further enlargement of the neutrophil clusters and an increase in hepatic in /uniFB01 ltration of neutrophils (Fig. 3f, g and Movie S4). The intensi /uniFB01 ed neutrophil swarming response was accompanied by visible necrotic areas in the liver, along with elevated serum levels of alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) in LM-infected SpX mice (Supplementary Fig. 4e g), -further supporting the notion that collateral liver damage caused by neutrophil swarming may contribute to the control of LM infection. Monocytes are critical for the protection against LM infection 33 and have been implicated in the termination of neutrophil swarming responses 26 . However, CCR2 RFP/+ monocytes were recruited similarly to the periphery of neutrophil clusters in both sham and SpXtreated mice (Supplementary Fig. 5a). In monocytopenic Ccr2 - -/ mice, the sizes of neutrophil swarms were comparable to those in WT mice, regardless of the presence or absence of the spleen (Supplementary Fig. 5b, c). These /uniFB01 ndings rule out the contribution of monocytes to the enhanced neutrophil swarming in SpX mice. In conclusion, these results suggest that ef /uniFB01 cient clearance of LM infection is associated

with prolonged and ampli /uniFB01 ed neutrophil swarming responses, and limiting neutrophil swarming may represent a strategy allowing the immune escape of LM.

## IFN-I aggravates LM infection by directly inhibiting neutrophil swarming

Despite the heightened neutrophil responses during LM infection, splenectomy did not alter the homeostatic properties of neutrophils. The cell number and maturity of circulating neutrophils remained unchanged in SpX mice at a steady state (Supplementary Fig. 4h), implying that the impact of LM on the spleen may underlie the regulation of neutrophil swarming. It has been reported that LM induces IFN-I production in the spleen, which is believed to impair the antibacterial function of macrophages, leading to the exacerbation of LM infection 34,35 . However, whether and how LM-induced IFN-I affects neutrophil function remains unclear. During early LM infection, approximately 5% of LM was sequestered in the spleen (Fig. 1a), and dynamic imaging revealed its rapid capture by red pulp macrophages (Supplementary Fig. 6a, b). Despite LM being predominantly captured by the liver rather than the spleen, the level of IFN-I expression was signi /uniFB01 cantly higher in the spleen than in the liver (Fig. 3h). Moreover, serum levels of IFN-I were signi /uniFB01 cantly lower in SpX mice than in sham control mice (Fig. 3i). These results led to the hypothesis that IFN-I may be the spleen-derived factor inhibiting neutrophil swarming. To this end, we utilized hydrodynamic injection (HDI) to induce sustained expression of IFN-I in the liver 36 . As expected, overexpression of IFN-I reduced the size of neutrophil clusters induced by LM, regardless of sex (Fig. 4a, b and Supplementary Fig. 6c), resulting in exacerbated LM infection (Fig. 4c). Similarly, augmented neutrophil swarming in SpX mice was severely blunted upon IFN-I overexpression (Supplementary Fig. 6d). Most importantly, type I IFN receptor (IFNAR) de /uniFB01 ciency led to enhanced neutrophil swarming during LM infection in control mice, but not in SpX mice (Fig. 4d -f).

Based on these /uniFB01 ndings, we infer that LM-stimulated splenic production of IFN-I may act on circulating neutrophils to impair their intrinsic ability to swarm within tissues. Supporting this, the inhibitory effect of IFN-I on neutrophil swarming was also evident in the infected spleen (Supplementary Fig. 6e h). -Furthermore, we established a Bacterial AGAR pellet imaging system (Fig. 4g), where neutrophils were attracted to and penetrated LM-encapsulated agar pellets, exhibiting a typical swarming behavior that was dependent on LM-triggered LTB4 production in neutrophils and thus could be antagonized by Zileuton (Supplementary Fig. 7a -d and Movie S5). In this model, IFN-I stimulation signi /uniFB01 cantly suppressed neutrophil swarming (Fig. 4h, i and Movie S5). In addition, blood neutrophils isolated from SpX mice that had impaired IFN-I production exhibited enhanced swarming responses compared to those from sham-treated mice (Supplementary Fig. 7e, f). Notably, IFN-I treatment of isolated neutrophils had negligible effects on their phagocytosis, ROS production, and killing of LM in vitro (Supplementary Fig. 7g -i), suggesting a minimal impact of IFN-I on the bactericidal function of neutrophils. Collectively, these results indicate that IFN-I can directly regulate neutrophil function mainly through inhibiting swarming responses, thereby exacerbating LM infection.

## IFN-I inhibits neutrophil swarming by antagonizing the activation of the ERK signaling pathway

Neutrophil swarming largely relies on the autocrine activity of LTB4 . 8 IFN-I stimulation inhibited 5-LOX expression and LTB4 synthesis in isolated neutrophils, providing mechanistic insights into the impaired neutrophil swarming (Supplementary Fig. 8a -e). A previous study highlighted the existence of an LTB4/ERK/5-LOX/LTB4 positive feedback signaling axis, which closely resembles the feed-forward mechanism of neutrophil swarming 37 . Additionally, it has been reported that IFN-I can inhibit the activation of ERK 38 . Therefore, we

wondered whether IFN-I affected LTB4 production and the swarming of neutrophils through the ERK pathway. Indeed, the phosphorylation of ERK in neutrophils was induced by LTB4 treatment, but was inhibited in the presence of IFN-I (Fig. 5a -d). Furthermore, the p-ERK inhibitor PD0325901 decreased LTB4 synthesis in neutrophils (Supplementary Fig. 8e), and suppressed their swarming towards bacterial agar pellets (Fig. 5e, f and Movie S5). Consistently, in vivo administration of PD0325901 also signi /uniFB01 cantly decreased neutrophil clusters induced by LM (Fig. 5g, h), while exacerbating LM infection (Fig. 5i). Since binding of IFN-I to IFNAR primarily activates the JAKSTAT pathway 39 , we aimed to investigate whether IFN-I inhibits ERK signaling in a JAK-STAT-dependent manner. As expected, the JAK1/2 inhibitor Ruxolitinib rescued LTB4-induced ERK phosphorylation in the presence of IFN-I (Fig. 5j, k), and largely abolished IFN-I-mediated suppression of neutrophil swarming in vitro (Fig. 5l, m). Since integrins are also essential for neutrophil swarming and CD11b upregulation is pivotal for neutrophil migration 8,40 , we investigated whether IFN-I affects CD11b expression in neutrophils. Our results showed that neutrophils in LM-infected WT and Ifnar - -/ micehad comparable levels of CD11b expression (Supplementary Fig. 8f), and IFN-I stimulation in vitro even slightly increased CD11b expression on neutrophils (Supplementary Fig. 8g). These data exclude the possibility that IFN-I suppresses neutrophil swarming by inhibiting CD11b expression. Taken together, these results suggest that IFNAR-JAK signaling disrupts the forward loop of neutrophil swarming by antagonizing LTB4mediated activation of the ERK pathway, effectively preventing further ampli /uniFB01 cation of the signaling cascade.

## Virus-induced IFN-I aggravates secondary LM infection by inhibiting neutrophil-swarming

Viral infections are well known to induce upregulation of IFN-I levels. Therefore, we wonder whether neutrophil swarming is inhibited during co-infections with viruses and bacteria, potentially exacerbating secondary bacterial infections. To establish a coinfection model, we pre-infected mice with either vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV, an RNA virus) or murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV, a DNA virus), and subsequently evaluated their susceptibility to secondary LM infection (Fig. 6a). In line with our speculation, both VSV and MCMV were able to enhancesecondaryLMinfection,leadingtoincreasedbacterial burden in the liver of virally co-infected mice (Fig. 6b, c), which could be attributed to the decrease in the formation of neutrophil clusters during secondary LM infection (Fig. 6d g). -Previous reports have indicated that in /uniFB02 uenza virus infection can also exacerbate secondary LM infection 41 . Consistently, our results revealed a signi /uniFB01 cant reduction in the formation of neutrophil clusters induced by LM upon in /uniFB02 uenza virus infection (Supplementary Fig. 9a -c).

To assess the impact of viral infection on neutrophil dynamics, we examined the proportion and migration of neutrophils in the coinfection model. Viral infection did not affect the proportion or number of neutrophils in the bone marrow after secondary LM infection (Supplementary Fig. 9d, e). Additionally, the liver in /uniFB01 ltration of neutrophils was comparable between co-infected mice and mice infected with LM alone at both 6 h (Supplementary Fig. 9f, g) and 24 h (Supplementary Fig. 9h, i) after LM infection. Consistently, intravital imaging of the cremaster muscle demonstrated normal neutrophil transendothelial migration, unaffected by viral infection (Supplementary Fig.9j -l and Movie S6). These results suggest that preexisting viral infection does not directly affect neutrophil numbers or tissue in /uniFB01 ltration.

However, at 16 h post-LM infection, the neutrophil clusters were muchsmallerinco-infected mice compared to those with LM infection alone (Fig. 6h, i and Movie S7), suggesting that a preexisting viral infection suppresses neutrophil swarming induced by subsequent LM infection. Additionally, viral infection was aggravated in Ifnar - -/ mice, but the size of neutrophil clusters induced by LM was enlarged as compared to that in WT mice (Fig. 6j, k). To exclude the effects of

h

Fig. 4 | IFN-I aggravates LM infection by directly inhibiting neutrophil

<!-- image -->

swarming. a -c Mice were subjected to HDI with 5 μ g pLive or pLiveIFN β plasmid 5dpriortoinfection. a Representative intravital images showing neutrophil clusters in the liver 24 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Scale bar, 200 μ m. b Quanti /uniFB01 cation of the size of neutrophil clusters, with each dot representing an infection focus. Data were from three mice in each group. ( P &lt;0.0001). c Bacterial load in the liver was assessed at 48 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Data were from four mice in each group. ( P =0.0268). d WT and Ifnar - -/ mice were infected with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Representative intravital images showing neutrophil clusters in the liver at 24 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFULM-GFP.Scalebar,

100 μ m. e WT and Ifnar - -/ mice underwent SpX. Representative intravital images showing neutrophil clusters in the liver at 24 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LMGFP. Scale bar, 100 μ m. f Quanti /uniFB01 cation of the size of neutrophil clusters, with each dot representing an infection focus. Data were from three mice in each group. ( P &lt;0.0001). g Illustration of the procedure for bacteria AGAR pellet imaging. h Bacteria AGAR pellet imaging was conducted to visualize neutrophil swarming with and without IFNβ 1 treatment. Scale bar, 200 μ m. i Quanti /uniFB01 cation of neutrophil cluster size at 150 min post-imaging, with each dot representing a neutrophil cluster. The experiment was repeated twice and statistically analyzed. ( P =0.0284). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. * P &lt;0.05; ** P &lt;0.01; *** P &lt;0.001.

aggravated viral infections in Ifnar - -/ mice, we puri /uniFB01 ed neutrophils fromthebonemarrowofbothWTand Ifnar - -/ mice, mixed them in a 1:1 ratio, and transferred them into WT mice for co-infection. The adoptive transfer of mixed neutrophils had no impact on the progression of viral or LM infections (Supplementary Fig. 9m -o). However, the proportion of Ifnar - -/ neutrophils in the infected foci was much higher thanthatof WTneutrophils(Fig. 6l),suggesting a cell-intrinsic effect of type I IFN signaling in suppressing neutrophil swarming. In conclusion, these results indicate that virus-induced IFN-I can promote secondary

bacterial infections by inhibiting neutrophil swarming at the local tissue level.

## IFN-I inhibits human neutrophil swarming by deactivating the ERK pathway

To investigate whether IFN-I also regulates the swarming behavior of humanneutrophilsduring co-infection, we induced human HL-60 cells to differentiate into neutrophil-like cells, known as dHL-60 cells, using DMSO 42 . Similar to mouse bone marrow neutrophils, the swarming of

Fig. 5 | IFN-I inhibits neutrophil swarming by antagonizing the activation of the ERK signaling pathway. a , b Bone marrow neutrophils were treated with IFNβ 1 andLTB4. Representative immuno /uniFB02 uorescent images ( a ) and statistics ( b ) of p-ERK in neutrophils with indicated treatment are shown. Each dot represents one cell. The experiment was repeated three times and statistically analyzed. Scale bar, 20 μ m. ( P &lt;0.0001; P &lt;0.0001). c d , Immunoblot analysis was performed to assess the level of p-ERK in neutrophils with and without IFNβ 1 treatment. The experiment was repeated three times and statistically analyzed. ( P =0.0196; P =0.0062). e Bacteria AGAR pellet imaging was conducted to compare BM neutrophil swarming between samples treated with and without PD0325901 (5 μ g/mL) for 4 h prior to imaging. Scale bar, 200 μ m. f Quanti /uniFB01 cation of neutrophil cluster size at 150min post-imaging, with each dot representing a neutrophil cluster. The experiment was repeated twice and statistically analyzed. ( P &lt;0.0001). g i -Mice were treated with vehicle or PD0325901 (40 mg/kg). g Representative intravital images showing neutrophil clusters in the liver 24 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU

<!-- image -->

LM-GFP. Scale bar, 200 μ m. h Quanti /uniFB01 cation of the size of neutrophil clusters, with each dot representing an infection focus. Data are from three mice in each group. ( P &lt;0.0001). i Bacterial load in the liver was assessed at 48 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFULM-GFP. Data are from 3 to 4 mice in each group. ( P =0.0208). , j k Bone marrow neutrophils were treated with IFNβ 1 plus LTB4 in the presence or absence of Ruxolitinib (20 μ g/mL). Representative immuno /uniFB02 uorescent images ( ) and staj tistics ( k ) of p-ERK in neutrophils with indicated treatment are shown. Each dot represents one cell. The experiment was repeated twice and statistically analyzed. Scale bar, 20 μ m. ( P &lt;0.0001). l Bacteria AGAR pellet imaging was conducted to visualize neutrophil swarming with and without Ruxolitinib in the presence of IFNβ 1 stimulation. Scale bar, 200 μ m. m Quanti /uniFB01 cation of neutrophil cluster size at 150min post-imaging, with each dot representing a neutrophil cluster. The experiment was repeated twice and statistically analyzed. ( P =0.0221). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. * P &lt;0.05; *** P &lt;0.001.

dHL-60 cells could also be induced by LM-encapsulated bacterial agar pellets and be inhibited by Zileuton (Supplementary Fig. 10a, b, and Movie S8). As expected, IFN-I treatment also inhibited dHL-60 cell swarming (Fig. 7a, b and Movie S8). In addition, IFN-I treatment suppressed the phosphorylation of ERK and inhibited the expression of 5-LOX in dHL-60 cells (Fig. 7c -f). Similarly, PD0325901 treatment reduced the responsiveness of dHL-60 cells to bacterial agar pellets (Fig. 7g, h and Movie S8). Considering that secondary bacterial infections are a signi /uniFB01 cant cause of mortality in COVID-19 patients 43 , we

collected peripheral blood samples from individuals diagnosed with COVID-19 and isolated their neutrophils. Consistent with previous reports 44 , serum IFN-I levels were signi /uniFB01 cantly elevated in these patients (Fig. 7i). The neutrophil swarming of COVID-19 patients was weaker than that of their healthy counterparts (Fig. 7j, k and Movie S9). In addition, the phosphorylation of ERK and the expression of ALOX5 in these neutrophils were also reduced (Supplementary Fig. 10c, e). In summary, these results suggest that the inhibitory mechanism of IFN-I on neutrophil swarming is applicable to human neutrophils.

Fig. 6 | Virus-induced IFN-I aggravates secondary LM infection by inhibiting neutrophil swarming. a -c Mice were infected with 1 × 10 6 PFU b VSV ( P =0.0286) or c MCMV (P=0.0002) 24h prior to LM infection, and bacterial load in the liver was assessed at 48 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Data are from 3 to 4 mice in each group. d g -Mice were infected with 1 × 10 6 PFU d VSV or f MCMV24h prior to LM-GFP infection, and representative intravital images showing neutrophil clusters in the liver 24 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFULM-GFP. Scale bar, 200 μ m. e g , Quanti /uniFB01 cation of the size of neutrophil clusters, with each dot representing an infection focus. Data were from 3 to 5 mice in each group. ( P &lt;0.0001; P &lt;0.0001). h Mice were infected with vehicle control, 1 × 10 6 PFU VSV or MCMV 24h prior to

<!-- image -->

with LM-GFP infection, and dynamic intravital images showing the neutrophil

6

swarming in the liver 16 h post-infection with 1 × 10

i

Quanti

/uniFB01

CFULM-GFP. Scale bar, 50

μ

m.

cation of neutrophil cluster sizes at 5-min intervals. Data of the LM group

were from three mice. Data of the VSV + LM group were from /uniFB01 ve mice. Data from the MCMV+LM group were from three mice. j WTand Ifnar - -/ mice were infected with 1 × 10 6 PFU MCMV 24h prior to LM infection, and representative intravital images showed neutrophil clusters in the liver 24 h post-infection with 1 × 10 6 CFU LM-GFP. Scale bar, 200 μ m. k Quanti /uniFB01 cation of the size of neutrophil clusters, with each dot representing an infected focus. Data were from three mice in each group. ( P &lt;0.0001). l Mice were infected with 1 × 10 6 PFU VSV or MCMV 24 h before LM infection. 1 × 10 6 WT and 1 × 10 6 Ifnar - -/ neutrophils were co-transferred 12 h after LM infection. Quanti /uniFB01 cation of the number of donor neutrophils within foci, with each dot representing an infection focus. Scale bar, 50 μ m. Data were from three mice in each group. ( P &lt;0.0001; P &lt;0.0001). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. * P &lt;0.05; *** P &lt;0.001.

a

Fig. 7 | IFN-I inhibits human neutrophil swarming by deactivating the ERK

<!-- image -->

pathway.a Bacteria AGAR pellet imaging was conducted to compare the swarming of dHL-60 cells with and without IFNα (100ng/mL) treatment. Scale bar, 200 μ m. b Quanti /uniFB01 cation of neutrophil cluster size at 150 min post-imaging, with each dot representing a neutrophil cluster. The experiment was repeated twice and statistically analyzed. ( P =0.0354). c , d dHL-60 cells were treated with IFNα and LTB4. Immunoblot analysis of p-ERK ( P =0.0259; P =0.0102) and 5-LOX ( P =0.0396; P =0.0236) in dHL-60 cells was conducted. The experiment was repeated three times and statistically analyzed. e f , Representative immuno /uniFB02 uorescent images ( e ) and statistics ( ) of p-ERK in dHL-60 cells with indicated treatment are shown. Each f dot represents one cell. The experiment was repeated twice and statistically analyzed. Scale bar, 20 μ m. ( P &lt;0.0001; P &lt;0.0001). g Bacteria AGAR pellet imaging was conducted to compare dHL-60 neutrophil swarming between samples with

and without PD0325901 (5 μ g/mL) treatment. Scale bar, 200 μ m. h Quanti /uniFB01 cation of neutrophil cluster size at 150 min post-imaging, with each dot representing a neutrophil cluster. The experiment was repeated twice and statistically analyzed. ( P &lt;0.0001). i Quanti /uniFB01 cation of serum levels of IFNα in healthy controls and COVID-19 patients, with each dot representing one person. The experiment was repeated twice and statistically analyzed. ( P =0.0012). j Bacterial agar pellet imaging was performed to compare the swarming behavior of human peripheral blood neutrophils between healthy controls and COVID-19 patients. Scale bar, 200 μ m. k Quanti /uniFB01 cation of neutrophil cluster size at 150 min post-imaging, with each dot representing one person. The experiment was repeated four times and statistically analyzed. ( P =0.0005). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. * P &lt;0.05; ** P &lt;0.01; *** P &lt;0.001.

## Discussion

In this study, we observed that LM rapidly escaped from KCs and replicated within hepatocytes rather than within KCs. Due to macrophages serving as the primary host for LM, extensive studies have focused on investigating the mechanisms of interaction between LM and macrophages at the cellular level . However, it is important to 2 acknowledge that these mechanisms only operate when LM remains

within the con /uniFB01 nes of the macrophage. Once LM escapes from the macrophage, these mechanisms become ineffective. In fact, the unique escape mechanisms employed by LM render in vivo infections more intricate than their in vitro counterparts at the cellular level. In our study, we found that LM is capable of prompt evasion from KCs in an LLO-dependent manner, as early as 2 -3 h post-infection. The ActAmediated cell-to-cell spread, appears to be nonessential for LM to

escape from KCs and for their clearance in the liver. Nevertheless, there exists literature suggesting that ActA plays a crucial role in LM invasion of the nervous system 45 , indicating that LM employs different invasion strategies in distinct tissues.

Macrophages play a crucial role in host defense against bacterial infections due to their potent bactericidal capacity. However, they suffer from a critical limitation -poor mobility. In contrast, neutrophils compensate for this weakness with their remarkable ability to move freely, enabling them to traverse the body and effectively address the limitations of macrophages. Despite their signi /uniFB01 cant in /uniFB01 ltration into the liver following LM infection, there exists con icting /uniFB02 evidence regarding the involvement of neutrophils in controlling LM infection 6,46 . We hypothesize that these discordant results may be attributed to the differential timing of neutrophil clearance mediated by antibodies. In the past, it was widely believed that neutrophils could exert their function once they in /uniFB01 ltrated the local tissue 47 . However, it is now recognized that upon in /uniFB01 ltration into the tissue, neutrophils undergofurther activation to congregate in damaged foci . Our results 8 demonstrate that once neutrophil clusters form, antibodies are unable to label neutrophils within the clusters (unpublished data). Consequently, using antibodies to clear neutrophils after LM infection may lead to ineffective neutrophil clearance. Conversely, clearing neutrophils using antibodies before LM infection signi /uniFB01 cantly exacerbates LM infection, highlighting the role of neutrophils in controlling LM infection. In fact, we showed that aggregated neutrophils can actively take up and eliminate extracellular LM, as well as induce bystander death of hepatocytes, thereby forming an immune barrier to limit LM invasion.

However, neutrophils also have limitations. On one hand, our imaging results revealed that once LM escapes from KCs, it quickly infects hepatocytes. Although neutrophils have already in /uniFB01 ltrated the liver at this stage, they fail to locate LM hiding within hepatocytes, leading to signi /uniFB01 cant propagation of LM within these cells. On the other hand, we observed that despite hepatocyte lysis releasing LM and triggering neutrophil activation, LM can employ additional mechanismssuchasIFN-Ito inhibit neutrophil function. IFN-I has been implicated as a potent regulator for many aspects of neutrophil activity, such as their lifespan 48 , chemotaxis 19,49 , and cytokine production 50 . Our /uniFB01 ndings revealed a cell-intrinsic effect of IFN-I in suppressing neutrophil swarming without compromising their bactericidal capacity or transendothelial migration during LM infection. This further highlights the complexity of context-dependent IFN-I signaling in modulating innate immune responses. In fact, neutrophils are not the only innate immune cell type affected by IFNAR signaling, LM-triggered IFN-I production is also reported to be detrimental to the antimicrobial activity of macrophages by inhibiting their activation and sensitizing them to death 51 . Given that monocytes entered the infection foci in large quantities almost simultaneously with neutrophils, IFN-I may be exploited by LM to evade immune surveillance from monocytes and/or their macrophage derivatives.

Despite the critical role of IFN-I in promoting innate immune evasion of LM in the liver, our results indicate that IFN-I is predominately produced in the spleen. Consequently, splenectomy abolished IFN-I production, resulting in enhanced neutrophil swarming and improved LM control. These data pinpoint a spleen-liver axis in regulating anti-microbial defense. Indeed, various splenic cell types, including macrophages, pDCs, Tip-DCs, and even B cells, are reported to produce IFN-I upon LM infection 52 , possibly due to the rapid shuttling of LM within different host cells in the spleen 53 . These cells may collectively contribute to elevated IFN-I levels in the circulation, which systemically impact the ability of neutrophils to swarm by antagonizing their intracellular ERK signaling in an IFNAR-JAK-dependent manner. In support of this, blood neutrophils that had not experienced robust IFN-I stimulation, such as those isolated from SpX-treated mice, exhibited intact swarming behavior. Conversely, blood neutrophils

from COVID-19 patients with elevated serum levels of IFN-I displayed impaired swarming.

Viral infections typically result in an increase in IFN-I levels, which can control viral infections through various mechanisms and have been reported to inhibit the recruitment of neutrophils during viral infections 49 . The role of neutrophils in controlling viral infections remains not fully understood and is subject to debate. While there are reports suggesting that neutrophils can release NETs to inhibit viral spread 54 , there are also instances where neutrophils can act as viral carriers, contributing to viral dissemination 55 . However, frequent reports of severe immunopathology resulting from neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration at the site of viral infection indicate that the organism must make cautious decisions regarding the utilization of neutrophils. Interestingly, we found that enhanced neutrophil swarming in SpX mice was correlated with severe liver damage. Intracellular bacteria such as LM and M. tuberculosis share similarities with viruses, for example, their ability to activate IFN-I expression 56,57 . We observed that IFN-I can restrict neutrophil swarming to prevent excessive tissue damage, and LM might exploit this mechanism to evade immune surveillance by neutrophils. Notably, viral infections in clinical settings often lead to secondary bacterial infections, independent of the speci /uniFB01 c types of viruses and bacteria involved 58,59 . Our results indicate that different viruses can exacerbate secondary LM infections through the virus-induced production of IFN-I, which inhibits neutrophil swarming. Of note, viral infection did not affect neutrophil rolling, tethering, or transmigration in in /uniFB02 amedvessels. This somewhatsupports the notion that IFN-I does not impair integrin activation, which is essential for neutrophil mobility. Although the precise molecular mechanisms by which IFN-I uncouples neutrophil transendothelial migration from swarming remain to be elucidated, abrogation of the LTB4-mediated feedback loop is at least partially involved. Nevertheless, our results highlight the function of IFN-I in ensuring an appropriate neutrophil response during viral infection, thereby preventing excessive tissue damage, albeit at the cost of increased sensitivity to secondary bacterial infections. These /uniFB01 ndings underscore the importance of prophylactic use of antibiotics as adjunctive therapy in clinical settings for patients with severe viral infections, particularly those who require exogenous IFN-I treatment.

In conclusion, our study utilized liver intravital imaging to provide a comprehensive and detailed understanding of the dynamic process of LM infection in the liver. We have identi /uniFB01 ed that LM employs distinct immune evasion strategies that target different cellular characteristics. Exploiting the relatively low motility of KCs, LM employs LLO to puncture the cell membrane of KCs, facilitating its escape and avoiding KC-mediated elimination. To evade immune surveillance by neutrophils, LM strategically proliferates inside hepatocytes, reducing its exposure to neutrophil detection. Furthermore, it can induce IFN-I to evade neutrophil-mediated elimination. These /uniFB01 ndings underscore signi /uniFB01 cant differences between in vivo and in vitro infection of the pathogen, highlighting the importance of studying pathogens within their natural microenvironment. Future studies aimed at elucidating the dynamic interactions between LM and other immune cells could allow ustogaindeeperinsightsintotheintricateco-evolutionary processes of pathogen-host competition. Such investigations will undoubtedly enhance our understanding of infectious diseases and facilitate the development of more effective strategies for combatting them.

## Methods

## Ethics statement

Animal experiments were conducted following the guidelines established by the Animal Care Committee of USTC (USTCACUC192401034). Theuseofhumanperipheral blood has been reviewed and approved by theMedicalResearchEthicsCommitteeoftheFirstAf /uniFB01 liated Hospital of USTC (2023KY369), with informed consent obtained from all volunteers.

## Mice

C57BL/six mice were purchased from Nanjing GemPharmatech Co., LTD. Ly6g -Cre-2A-tdTomato mice (Cat. NO. NM-KI-200219) were purchased from Shanghai Model Organisms Center, Inc. Ifnar - -/ mice, mT/ mGmice, and CCR2 RFP / RFP ki/ko mice were originally from the Jackson Laboratory. Padi4 - -/ mice were originally from Cyagen Bioscience Inc. All mice were housed in speci /uniFB01 c pathogen-free (SPF) facilities at USTC. Unless otherwise speci /uniFB01 ed, all mice used in the experiments were male, ranging in age from 6 to 12 weeks.

## Antibodies and reagents

Fluorescein-conjugated antibodies, including APC/Cy7 anti-mouse CD45 (30-F11), PE/Cy7 anti-mouse CD11b (M1/70), PE or AF647 antimouse Ly6G (1A8), APC or PE anti-mouse F4/80 (BM8), AF647 antimouseCD31(MEC13.3), APC anti-mouse CD169 (3D6.112), PE/Cyanine7 anti-mouse CD117 (c-kit) (2B8), Brilliant Violet 605 ™ anti-mouse CD184 (CXCR4) (L276F12), APC anti-mouse CD182 (CXCR2) (SA045E1), 488 anti-mouse CD170 (Siglec-F) (S17007L), and PerCP/Cy5.5 anti-mouse Ly-6C (HK1.4) were obtained from Biolegend and used for /uniFB02 ow cytometry or intravital imaging. Brilliant Violet ™ 786 anti-mouse CD11b (M1/70) was obtained from eBioscience and used for /uniFB02 ow cytometry. Theantibodies used for western blotting or immuno /uniFB02 uorescence were as follows: GAPDH monoclonal antibody (abs830030, 1:2000, Absin); ERK1/2 polyclonal antibody (11257-1-AP, 1:1000, Proteintech); phospho-ERK1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204) polyclonal antibody (28733-1-AP, 1:1000 or 1:200, Proteintech) and 5-LOX polyclonal antibody (10021-1-Ig, 1:100, Proteintech). Three-color prestained protein Marker (EC1019) was from Shandong Sparkjade Biotechnology Co., Ltd. The BCA Protein Assay Kit (PA002-01A) was obtained from Novoprotein. The EndoFreePlasmidMidiKit(CW2105S)wasfromobtainedCWBIO.CFSE cell division tracker kit (5 μ M, Cat. 423801) and PI (25 μ g, Cat. 421301) were purchased from BioLegend. DiD (5 μ M, Cat. D7757) was from Invitrogen. DCFH-DA (2 ,7 -Dichloro ' ' /uniFB02 uorescin diacetate) (10 μ M, Cat. D6883) was from Sigma. LTB4 (1 μ M, Cat. 20110) was from Cayman. LPS (200 ng/mL, Cat. L2630) and fMLP (1 μ M, Cat. F35065) were from Sigma. Recombinant mouse IFNβ 1 (20ng/mL, Cat. 581302) and recombinant human IFNα (100 ng/mL, Cat. 592702) were from Biolegend. Zileuton (Cat. S1443), PD0325901 (Cat. S1036), Ruxolitinib (Cat. S1378), Cl-amidine (Cat. S8141), and Setanaxib (Cat. S7171) were fromSelleck. Clodronate liposomes (100 μ L, Cat. C44J0819) were from LIPOSOMA.

## Cell lines and plasmids

The HL-60 cell line was obtained from Prof. Wen Pan (USTC) and was cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. The pLive plasmid was kindly provided by Prof. Rui Sun (USTC). The DNA fragment encoding ifn β was cloned and then inserted into the pLive plasmid for constructing the pLive-IFN β plasmid. For HDI, mice were injected with 5 μ g of pLive or pLive-IFN β plasmid in 2 mL of saline within a duration of 8 -10 s.

## Viruses and bacteria

MCMVviralstocks were kindly provided by Prof. Zhigang Tian (USTC). VSV and IFV were kindly provided by Prof. Daxing Gao (USTC). Mice were intravenously infected with MCMV (1× 10 6 PFU), VSV (1 × 10 6 PFU), or IFV (1 × 10 4 PFU). LM were kindly provided by Prof. Weihuan Fang (Zhejiang University). LM-GFP, LMΔ actAGFP and LMΔ hly -GFP were kindly provided by Prof. Ning Wu (Huazhong University of Science and Technology). All LM strains were derived from the 10403S strain and were cultured in brain heart infusion (BHI) medium supplemented with 5 μ g/mL erythromycin until reaching the logarithmic growth phase (OD600 nm=0.5). Mice were intravenously infected with LM, using either 1 × 10 6 or 1 × 10 8 CFU. Additionally, subcutaneous infection was administered with 1 × 10 8 CFU. GFP-tagged MW2 was

generated as described previously 60 and was cultured overnight in BHI medium supplemented with 5 μ g/mL erythromycin, followed by subculture until the logarithmic phase (OD600 nm = 1.0). GFP-tagged E. coli was generated by electroporating the pSLC-284-vsfGFP plasmid into the CFT-073 strain and was cultured in LB medium supplemented with 50 μ g/mL kanamycin until the logarithmic phase (OD600 nm = 0.6). Mice were intravenously infected with 5 × 10 7 CFU MW2 or CFT073. To assess bacterial load in organs, tissue homogenates were diluted serially using PBS and then plated onto agar medium. The CFUs were counted after 16 -24h of incubation at 37 °C.

## Intravital imaging of the liver, spleen and cremaster muscle

For intravital imaging, mice were anesthetized using 2.5% Avertin (300 mg/kg/mouse), comprising 0.25 g of 2,2,2-tribromethanol (Sigma) and 0.25 mL of 2-methyl-2-butanol (Sigma). Tail vein cannulation was performed to facilitate the delivery of /uniFB02 uorescent labeling reagents and additional anesthetics. Liver intravital imaging was executed as previously described 61 . The left lateral lobe of the liver was gently placed onto a glass coverslip integrated into the microscope stage. The coverslip was then covered with dampened Kimwipes soaked in saline solution to minimize movement. For spleen intravital imaging, the spleen was exposed onto a glass coverslip af /uniFB01 xed to the microscope stage. Similar to the liver setup, strips of saline-moistened Kimwipes were used to prevent unnecessary motion. In the case of cremaster muscle intravital imaging, the scrotal hair was removed, and the outer skin was incised while removing excess fat. The cremaster muscle was secured using cotton thread and incised longitudinally with an electric coagulation knife. Subsequently, the cremaster muscle was laid onto a glass coverslip on the microscope stage, again utilizing saline-moistened Kimwipes to restrict movement. Images were acquired using an inverted microscope (Nikon Ti2-E) equipped with a Yokogawa CSUW1 spinning disk confocal scanner unit. Fluorescence signals were captured using the iChrome MLE compact four-color laser engine (405 nm, 488 nm, 561 nm, and 640 nm, Toptica) coupled with four speci /uniFB01 c emission /uniFB01 lters (B447/60, B525/50, B617/73, and B685/ 40). Recordings were made using a sCMOS camera (Prime95B, Photometrics) that offers a substantial /uniFB01 eld of view (sensor diagonal of 18.7 mm) and high resolution (11 μ mpixel size). The acquired imaging data were subsequently analyzed using either the NIS-Elements or Imaris software (version 7.0, Bitplane).

## Splenectomy

Mice were anesthetized using iso /uniFB02 urane. The surgical site, extending from the base of the tail to the midpoint of the left ear, was shaved using a razor blade. Iodine solution was then applied to the incision area using a cotton swab. A 1 cm longitudinal incision was made in the outer skin. The inner skin was grasped with toothed forceps and incised to 0.8 cm. The spleen was carefully extracted with forceps, dissected from the surrounding fat, and the two vessels below the spleen were ligated with silk thread. The spleen was then excised using ophthalmicscissors. The fat tissue was repositioned, and the inner skin was closed with continuous sutures using hemostatic forceps. The sutured area was cleansed with iodine solution, and the outer skin was secured with a surgical skin stapler.

## Flow cytometry

To isolate liver neutrophils, mouse livers were harvested, minced into small pieces, and then dissociated using the GentleMACs system. The liver homogenates were enzymatically digested in prewarmed DMEM containing 0.5 mg/mL collagenase I (Sigma) and 5 U/mL DNase I (Sigma) at 37 °C for 20 min with shaking. The digested mixture was then passed through a 200-gauge mesh. Following a brief centrifugation step to eliminate hepatocytes and tissue debris, cells were collected by pelleting and subsequently washed through centrifugation at 400g for 5 min at 4 °C. Liver non-parenchymal cells were obtained

after lysing red blood cells with ACK buffer (Biolegend) and then were resuspended in ice-cold 1× PBS. To isolate neutrophils from bone marrow, the procedure involved aspirating bone marrow from the femurs and tibias using a syringe. The aspirated bone marrow was then gently dispersed using a pipette to ensure even distribution. Subsequently, the dispersed bone marrow wascentrifuged at 400 g for 5 min at 4 °C to form a cell pellet. This pellet was treated with ACK buffer to effectively lyse red blood cells and then was resuspended in ice-cold 1× PBS. For /uniFB02 ow cytometry analysis, a total of 1 × 10 6 cells were treated with Fc blocker (2.4G2, Bio X Cell) for 20 min to prevent non-speci /uniFB01 c binding. Subsequently, the cells were stained with a mixture of /uniFB02 uorophore-conjugated antibodies against surface markers for 30 min at 4 °C in the absence of light.

## Isolation and puri /uniFB01 cation of mouse and human neutrophils

Mouse neutrophils were isolated from the bone marrow using a three-layer Percoll (GE Healthcare, Cat.17-0891-09) gradient consisting of 72%, 64%, and 52%, following a previously established protocol 62 . Neutrophil purity exceeded 95%, as con rmed by the /uniFB01 CD45 + CD11b + Ly6G + phenotype observed in /uniFB02 ow cytometry analysis. Similarly, human neutrophils were isolated from peripheral blood using a single-layer Ficoll-Hypaque (Tianjin Haoyang Biological Manufacture Co., Ltd, Cat. LTS1077) solution, following a previously described method 63 . Neutrophil purity exceeded 95%, as indicated by the CD45 + CD11b + CD15 + CD16 + phenotype observed in /uniFB02 ow cytometry analysis.

## Bacterial AGAR pellet Imaging

The preparation of LM-encapsulated bacterial Agar pellets was conducted as follows: Overnight cultures of LM were collected and resuspended at a concentration of 1 × 10 10 CFU/mL in BHI Agar prewarmed to 50 °C. A total of 0.1 -0.5 μ L of this bacterial solution was added into a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube containing 1 mL of pre-chilled mineral oil supplemented with 1% Tween-20. Bacterial-encapsulated agar pellets were generated after a 2-h incubation on ice. Excess mineral oil was discarded, and the Eppendorf tube was topped up with cold saline. The agar pellets were then washed 5 -6 times by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min at 4°C. Simultaneously, 60 65 -μ L of 10 mg/mL hyaluronic acid solution (Solarbio, Cat. S7020) was added to the bottom of a glass-bottom culture dish. The dish was centrifuged at 1650 g for 1 min using a spin coater to evenly spread the gel across the dish. Subsequently, 5 -8 prepared bacterial agar beads were placed onto the gel, and the dish was centrifuged twice at 1650 g for 1 min to anchor the agar beads to the bottom of the dish. CFSE-labeled mouse, human neutrophils or HL-60 cells, or neutrophils isolated from Ly6G-cre-tdTomato mice (5 × 10 5 cells/mL) were slowly and steadily added into the dish from the sidewall to avoid disturbing the agar beads. The dish was then placed into a livecell microscope incubation chamber (Tokai Hit) to maintain a constant temperature of 37 °C and CO2 concentration of 5%. Time-lapse live cell images were acquired using an inverted spinning disk confocal system, as described above.

## Live-cell imaging of neutrophils in vitro

Neutrophils were isolated from mouse bone marrow and resuspended to a concentration of 1 × 10 6 cells/mL. A total of 2 mL of this cell suspension was added to a 35 mm glass-bottom culture dish. The dish was then placed into a live-cell microscope incubation chamber (Tokai Hit) to maintain optimal conditions for cell culture. At the start of imaging, 2 × 10 8 CFU LM-GFP were added to the dish. PI was introduced 3 min after the start of imaging to label dead cells. For in vitro stimulation assays, a total of 5 × 10 5 bone marrow neutrophils were seeded into a 48 well-plate. Subsequently, 1 × 10 7 CFU of overnight-cultured LM was added to each well. After 1 h of stimulation, cells were harvested by centrifugation and analyzed for phagocytosis of LM using /uniFB02 ow

cytometry. The supernatant of cell culture was also collected for measurement of LTB4 production.

## ELISA and ALT/AST

Blood samples were acquired through cardiac puncture or from the orbital venous plexus. Subsequently, serum was separated from the blood by centrifugation at 3000 g for 5 min. Levels of mice IFNα (Cat. H023) and IFNβ (Cat. H024) were assessed using commercially available ELISA kits (Nanjing Jiancheng Bio. Co.), following the manufacturer s ' protocols. Levels of human IFNα were assessed using commerciallyavailable ELISA kits (Dakewe, Cat. 1110012), following the manufacturer s instructions. Levels of LTB4 in neutrophil culture were ' assessed using commercially available ELISA kits (mlbio, Cat. ml201802), following the manufacturer s protocols. ALT (Cat. C009) ' and AST (Cat. C010) levels were quanti /uniFB01 ed using commercially available diagnostic kits (NJJCBIO) in accordance with the manufacturer s ' guidelines.

## Western blot

Cells were lysed using NP-40 buffer supplemented with proteinase and phosphataseinhibitor cocktails. Protein content was determined using a BCA assay, and proteins were denatured by boiling for 10 -15 min in 1× sampling buffer. Proteins were then separated by SDS-PAGE. The separated proteins on the gel were transferred onto PVDF membranes, whichwereincubated with designated primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. Subsequently, horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies were applied and incubated with membranes for 1 h at room temperature. Chemiluminescencesignals were captured using the SH-Compact 523 Imaging System from Hangzhou Shenhua Technology Co., Ltd.

## Immuno uorescence /uniFB02

Cells were /uniFB01 xed using 4% paraformaldehyde, then air-dried on glass slides. Membranes were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100. After an overnight incubation at 4 °C with a speci /uniFB01 c primary antibody in a humid, dark chamber, cells were washed with 1× PBS. A /uniFB02 uorescent secondary antibody was applied and incubated for 1 h at room temperature in a light-protected humid chamber. Following 1× PBS washing to remove the secondary antibody, DAPI staining was performed before mounting with a coverslip.

## QPCR

RNA extraction and puri /uniFB01 cation were conducted using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer s ' protocol. After removal of genomic DNA with gDNA Wiper (Vazyme), RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA using the HiScript III qRT SuperMix kit (Vazyme). For semi-quantitative real-time PCR analysis of gene expression, cDNA samples were combined with primer pairs and ChamQ Universal SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme). The PCR ampli /uniFB01 -cation was performed using Roche LightCycler 96 instruments. The 2× Hieff PCR Master Mix (Cat. 10102) was from Yeasen. The primer list follows: Gapdh sense (5 -CAA CTT TGG CAT TGT GGA AGG-3 ) and ' ' Gapdh anti-sense (5 -GAT GCA GGG ATG ATG TTC TGG-3 ); ' ' Ifn α sense (5 -ACA TCA AAG GAC TCA TCT GC-3 ) and ' ' Ifn α anti-sense (5 -ACA CAG ' TGA TCC TGT GGA AG-3 ); ' Ifn β sense (5 -AGC TCC AAG AAA GGA CGA ' AC-3 ) and ' Ifn β anti-sense (5 -GAA AGA CAT TCT GGA GCA TC-3 ); ' ' Alox5 sense (5 -TGG ACG TGC AAA ATT GGC CC-3 ) and ' ' Alox5 anti-sense (5 -' TCGGGGCAGATCCTTGTGGC-3); ' Cxcr2 sense (5 -CCC ATG CCA CTC ' AGA GAA CC-3 ) and ' Cxcr2 anti-sense (5 -AGA ACA GGT CAG CAA TGG ' CC-3 ); ' Fpr2 sense(5 -GGC TCAGAACCACCGCACTG-3 )and ' ' Fpr2 antisense (5 -ATC AGT TTG AGC CCA GGA TC-3 ); human-' ' GAPDH sense (5 -GTC AAG GCT GAG AAC GGG AA-3 ) and human-' ' GAPDH anti-sense (5 -AAA TGA GCC CCA GCC TTC TC-3 ); human-' ' ALOX5 sense (5 -CAA ' CAC TAT TTC TGA GCG GG-3) and human-' ALOX5 anti-sense (5 -GTT ' CCC TTG CTG GAC CTC CT 3 ). -'

## Statistical analysis

All experiments were independently replicated a minimum of two times, each with at least three biological samples per group. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 8.0. Results were presented as mean ± SEM. Unpaired Student s t-test was employed for ' pairwise comparisons between two distinct groups. For comparisons involving multiple groups, an overall one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett s multiple comparisons test was utilized. Mouse survival was ' evaluated using a two-sided log-rank test. * P &lt;0.05, ** P &lt;0.01, *** P &lt;0.001; ns no signi /uniFB01 cance.

## Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.

## Data availability

The authors declare that the data generated in this study are provided within the article and its Supplementary Information /uniFB01 les. Time-lapse images presented in this study were extracted from videos. Some original videos supporting these /uniFB01 ndings are not provided due to space limitations, but are available upon request from the corresponding author if necessary. Source data are provided with this paper.

## References

- 1. Murray, E. G. D., Webb, R. A. &amp; Swann, M. B. R. A disease of rabbits characterised by a large mononuclear leucocytosis, caused by a hitherto undescribed bacillus Bacterium monocytogenes (n.sp.). J. Pathol. Bacteriol. 29 , 407 -439 (1926).
- 2. Radoshevich, L. &amp; Cossart, P. Listeria monocytogenes : towards a complete picture of its physiology and pathogenesis. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 16 , 32 -46 (2017).
- 3. Ebe, Y. et al. The role of Kupffer cells and regulation of neutrophil migration into the liver by macrophage in /uniFB02 ammatory protein-2 in primary listeriosis in mice. Pathol. Int. 49 , 519 -532 (1999).
- 4. Czuczman, M. A. et al. Listeria monocytogenes exploits efferocytosis to promote cell-to-cell spread. Nature 509 , 230 -234 (2014).
- 5. Smith, G. A., Portnoy, D. A. &amp; Theriot, J. A. Asymmetric distribution of the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein is required and suf /uniFB01 -cient to direct actin-based motility. Mol. Microbiol 17 , 945 -951 (1995).
- 6. Carr, K. D. et al. Speci /uniFB01 c depletion reveals a novel role for neutrophil-mediated protection in the liver during Listeria monocytogenes infection. Eur. J. Immunol. 41 , 2666 -2676 (2011).
- 7. Nathan, C. Neutrophils and immunity: challenges and opportunities. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6 , 173 -182 (2006).
- 8. Lämmermann, T. et al. Neutrophil swarms require LTB4 and integrins at sites of cell death in vivo. Nature 498 , 371 -375 (2013).
- 9. Kienle, K. et al. Neutrophils self-limit swarming to contain bacterial growth in vivo. Science 372 , eabe7729 (2021).
- 10. Pestka, S., Krause, C. D. &amp; Walter, M. R. Interferons, interferon-like cytokines. Immunol. Rev. 202 , 8 -32 (2004).
- 11. González-Navajas, J. M., Lee, J., David, M. &amp; Raz, E. Immunomodulatory functions of type I interferons. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12 , 125 135 (2012). -
- 12. Mesev, E. V., LeDesma, R. A. &amp; Ploss, A. Decoding type I and III interferon signalling during viral infection. Nat. Microbiol. 4 , 914 924 (2019). -
- 13. Auerbuch, V., Brockstedt, D. G., Meyer-Morse, N., O Riordan, M. &amp; ' Portnoy, D. A. Mice lacking the type I interferon receptor are resistant to Listeria monocytogenes . J. Exp. Med. 200 , 527 -533 (2004).
- 14. Stanley, S. A., Johndrow, J. E., Manzanillo, P. &amp; Cox, J. S. The type I IFN response to infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis requires

- ESX-1-mediated secretion and contributes to pathogenesis. J. Immunol. 178 , 3143 -3152 (2007).
- 15. Henry, T. et al. Type I IFN signaling constrains IL-17A/F secretion by γδ T cells during bacterial infections. J. Immunol. 184 , 3755 -3767 (2010).
- 16. Osborne, S. E. et al. Type I interferon promotes cell-to-cell spread of Listeria monocytogenes Cell. Microbiol. . https://doi.org/10.1111/cmi. 12660 (2017).
- 17. Tan, J. M. J. et al. Listeria exploits IFITM3 to suppress antibacterial activity in phagocytes. Nat. Commun. 12 , 4999 (2021).
- 18. Rayamajhi, M., Humann, J., Penheiter, K., Andreasen, K. &amp; Lenz, L. L. Induction of IFN-alphabeta enables Listeria monocytogenes to suppress macrophage activation by IFN-gamma. J. Exp. Med. 207 , 327 337 (2010). -
- 19. Brzoza-Lewis, K. L., Jason Hoth, J. &amp; Hiltbold, E. M. Type I interferon signaling regulates the composition of in /uniFB02 ammatory in /uniFB01 ltrates upon infection with Listeria monocytogenes . Cell. Immunol. 273 , 41 51 (2012). -
- 20. Jia, T., Leiner, I., Dorothee, G., Brandl, K. &amp; Pamer, E. G. MyD88 and type I interferon receptor-mediated chemokine induction and monocyte recruitment during Listeria monocytogenes infection. J. Immunol. 183 , 1271 -1278 (2009).
- 21. McNab, F., Mayer-Barber, K., Sher, A., Wack, A. &amp; O Garra, A. ' Type I interferons in infectious disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15 , 87 103 (2015). -
- 22. Sheykhsaran, E., Hemmat, N. &amp; Baghi, H. B. In /uniFB02 uenza A virus and related secondary bacterial infections. Rev. Med. Microbiol. 30 , 205 211 (2019). -
- 23. Manna, S., Baindara, P. &amp; Mandal, S. M. Molecular pathogenesis of secondary bacterial infection associated to viral infections including SARS-CoV-2. J. Infect. Public Health 13 , 1397 -1404 (2020).
- 24. Zeng, Z. T. et al. CRIg functions as a macrophage pattern recognition receptor to directly bind and capture blood-borne gram-positive bacteria. Cell Host Microbe 20 , 99 -106 (2016).
- 25. Blériot, C. et al. Liver-resident macrophage necroptosis orchestrates type 1 microbicidal in /uniFB02 ammation and type-2-mediated tissue repair during bacterial infection. Immunity 42 , 145 -158 (2015).
- 26. Uderhardt, S., Martins, A. J., Tsang, J. S., Lämmermann, T. &amp; Germain, R. N. Resident macrophages cloak tissue microlesions to prevent neutrophil-driven in /uniFB02 ammatory damage. Cell 177 , 541 555.e517 (2019). -
- 27. Dahlgren, C., Karlsson, A. &amp; Bylund, J. Intracellular neutrophil oxidants: from laboratory curiosity to clinical reality. J. Immunol. 202 , 3127 3134 (2019). -
- 28. Laleu, B. et al. First in class, potent, and orally bioavailable NADPH oxidase isoform 4 (Nox4) inhibitors for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary /uniFB01 brosis. J. Med. Chem. 53 , 7715 -7730 (2010).
- 29. Castanheira, F. V. S. &amp; Kubes, P. Neutrophils and NETs in modulating acute and chronic in /uniFB02 ammation. Blood 133 , 2178 -2185 (2019).
- 30. Li, P. et al. PAD4 is essential for antibacterial innate immunity mediated by neutrophil extracellular traps. J. Exp. Med. 207 , 1853 1862 (2010). -
- 31. N, E. S. W. C. H. A. S. I. R. I. S. Enhanced resistance to Listeria monocytogenes in splenectomized mice. Immunology 33 , 851 (1977).
- 32. Skamene, E., Chayasirisobhon, W. &amp; Konshavn, P. A. L. Increased phagocytic activity of splenectomized mice challenged with Listeria monocytogenes . Immunology 34 , 901 -907 (1978).
- 33. Serbina, N. V., Shi, C. &amp; Pamer, E. G. in Advances in Immunology , Vol. 113 (eds Emil, R. U. &amp; Javier, A. C.) 119 -134 (Academic Press, 2012).
- 34. Chakravortty, D. et al. Production of IFNβ during Listeria monocytogenes infection is restricted to monocyte/macrophage lineage. PLoS One 6 , e18543 (2011).
- 35. WOOD,P.R.,Young,A.M.,McKIMM-BRESCHKIN,J.L.&amp;CHEERS,C. Effect of splenectomy on production of interferon and

colonystimulating factor in Listeria monocytogenes -infected mice. Infect. Immun. 46 , 860 -861 (1984).

- 36. Zhang, G. F., Budker, V. &amp; Wolff, J. A. High levels of foreign gene expression in hepatocytes after tail vein injections of naked plasmid DNA. Hum. Gene Ther. 10 , 1735 -1737 (1999).
- 37. Hu, N. et al. A novel positive feedback loop involving FASN/p-ERK1/ 2/5-LOX/LTB4/FASN sustains high growth of breast cancer cells. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 32 , 921 -929 (2011).
- 38. Romerio, F., A. R. a. D. Z. Interferonα 2b reduces phosphorylation and activity of MEK and ERK through a Ras/Raf-independent mechanism. Br. J. Cancer 83 , 532 -538 (2000).
- 39. Platanias, L. C. Mechanisms of type-I- and type-II-interferonmediated signalling. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5 , 375 -386 (2005).
- 40. Song, Z., Bhattacharya, S., Clemens, R. A. &amp; Dinauer, M. C. Molecular regulation of neutrophil swarming in health and disease: lessons from the phagocyte oxidase. iScience 26 , 108034 (2023).
- 41. Jamieson, A. M., Yu, S., Annicelli, C. H. &amp; Medzhitov, R. In /uniFB02 uenza virus-induced glucocorticoids compromise innate host defense against a secondary bacterial infection. Cell Host Microbe 7 , 103 114 (2010). -
- 42. Manda-Handzlik, A. et al. The in /uniFB02 uenceof agents differentiating HL60 cells toward granulocyte-like cells on their ability to release neutrophil extracellular traps. Immunol. Cell Biol. 96 , 413 -425 (2018).
- 43. Langford, B. J. et al. Antimicrobial resistance in patients with COVID19: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Microbe 4 , e179 e191 (2023). -
- 44. Huang, L. et al. Dynamic blood single-cell immune responses in patients with COVID-19. Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 6 , 110 (2021).
- 45. Maudet, C. et al. Bacterial inhibition of Fas-mediated killing promotesneuroinvasion andpersistence. Nature 603 , 900 906(2022). -
- 46. Shi, C. et al. Ly6G+ neutrophils are dispensable for defense against systemic Listeria monocytogenes infection. J. Immunol. 187 , 5293 5298 (2011). -
- 47. Ley, K. et al. Neutrophils new insights and open questions. Sci. Immunol. 3 , eaat4579 (2018).
- 48. Xin, L. et al. Type I IFN receptor regulates neutrophil functions and innate immunity to Leishmania parasites. J. Immunol. 184 , 7047 7056 (2010). -
- 49. Stock, A. T., Smith, J. M. &amp; Carbone, F. R. Type I IFN suppresses Cxcr2driven neutrophil recruitment into the sensory ganglia during viral infection. J. Exp. Med. 211 , 751 -759 (2014).
- 50. Lebratti, T. et al. A sustained type I IFN-neutrophil-IL-18 axis drives pathology during mucosal viral infection. eLife 10 , e65762 (2021).
- 51. Boxx, G. M. &amp; Cheng, G. The roles of type I interferon in bacterial infection. Cell Host Microbe 19 , 760 -769 (2016).
- 52. Ali, S. et al. Sources of type I interferons in infectious immunity: plasmacytoid dendritic cells not always in the driver s seat. ' Front. Immunol. 10 , 778 (2019).
- 53. Aoshi, T. et al. The cellular niche of Listeria monocytogenes infection changes rapidly in the spleen. Eur. J. Immunol. 39 , 417 425 (2009). -
- 54. Jenne, Craig N. et al. Neutrophils recruited to sites of infection protect from virus challenge by releasing neutrophil extracellular traps. Cell Host Microbe 13 , 169 -180 (2013).
- 55. Bai, F. et al. A paradoxical role for neutrophils in the pathogenesis of west Nile virus. J. Infect. Dis. 202 , 1804 -1812 (2010).
- 56. Hawn, T. R., Wiens, K. E. &amp; Ernst, J. D. The mechanism for type I interferon induction by Mycobacterium tuberculosis is bacterial strain-dependent. PLoS Pathog. 12 , e1005809 (2016).
- 57. Redford, P. S. et al. In /uniFB02 uenza A virus impairs control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis coinfection through a type I interferon receptor dependent pathway. -J. Infect. Dis. 209 , 270 -274 (2014).

- 58. Cillóniz, C. et al. Bacterial co-infection with H1N1 infection in patients admitted with community acquired pneumonia. J. Infect. 65 , 223 -230 (2012).
- 59. Liu, Y. et al. Outcomes of respiratory viral-bacterial co-infection in adult hospitalized patients. eClinicalMedicine . https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.eclinm.2021.100955 (2021).
- 60. Liu, W. et al. In situ expansion and reprogramming of Kupffer cells elicit potent tumoricidal immunity against liver metastasis. J. Clin. Investig. 133 , e157937 (2023).
- 61. Zeng, Z. et al. Sex-hormone-driven innate antibodies protect females and infants against EPEC infection. Nat. Immunol. 19 , 1100 1111 (2018). -
- 62. Ubags, N. D. J. &amp; Suratt, B. T. in Lung Innate Immunity and In /uniFB02 ammation Methods in Molecular Biology , Ch. 4, 45 -57 (Springer, 2018).
- 63. ANDERSEN, D. Ea. B. R. SINGLE-STEP SEPARATION OF RED BLOOD CELLS. J. Immunol. Methods 5 , 249 -252 (1974).

## Acknowledgements

We thank Prof. Jianhua Li (Fudan University) for providing Ifnar - -/ mice, and Prof. Xu Wang (Jiangsu University) for providing Padi4 - -/ mice. We also thank Prof. Wen Pan (USTC) for providing the HL-60 cell line and Prof. Rui Sun (USTC) for providing the pLive plasmid. We are grateful to Prof. Zhigang Tian (USTC), Prof. Daxing Gao (USTC), Prof. Jingren Zhang (Tsinghua University), and Prof. Weihuan Fang (Zhejiang University) for providing viral and bacterial strains. This work was funded by the National Key Research and Development Project of China (Grant# 2023YFC2306203, to Z.Z.), National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) grants 82071773 and 32270958 (to Z.Z.), Research Funds of Center for Advanced Interdisciplinary Science and Biomedicine of IHM (Grant# QYPY20220001, to Z.Z.), and the USTC Research Funds of the Double First-Class Initiative (Grant# YD9100002050, to Z.Z.).

## Author contributions

S.L. designed and conducted the experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. Q.Y. and J.L. performed some experiments. H.Y. and H.J. provided technical assistance for bacterial agar pellet imaging. R.Q. and M.Z. collected human peripheral blood samples. N.W. provided technical assistance for the L.M. infection model. L.L. and Z.Z. conceived the research, supervised the study, and edited the manuscript.

## Competing interests

The authors have no con /uniFB02 icts of interest to declare.

## Additional information

Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-53060-4.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Lu Li or Zhutian Zeng.

Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Rance Berg, Tim Lämmermann and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review /uniFB01 le is available.

## Reprints and permissions information

is available at

http://www.nature.com/reprints

Publisher s note ' Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af /uniFB01 liations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modi /uniFB01 ed the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article s Creative ' Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article s Creative Commons ' licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

©The Author(s) 2024