|

|

## REVIEW

## Sex hormones in COVID-  19 severity: The quest for evidence and influence mechanisms

|

Haiqing Xiao      Jiayi Wei      Lunzhi Yuan      Jiayuan Li      Chang Zhang | | | |

1

1

1

1

2

Gang Liu 1

Xuan Liu

|

2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

1 State Key Laboratory of Vaccines for Infectious Diseases, Xiang An Biomedicine Laboratory &amp; Center for Molecular Imaging and Translational Medicine, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China

2 Clinical Center for Biotherapy, Zhongshan Hospital (Xiamen), Fudan University, Xiamen, China

## Correspondence

Gang Liu, State Key Laboratory of Vaccines for Infectious Diseases, Xiang An Biomedicine Laboratory &amp; Center for Molecular Imaging and Translational Medicine, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361100, China. Email: gangliu.cmitm@xmu.edu.cn

Xuan Liu, Clinical Center for Biotherapy, Zhongshan Hospital (Xiamen), Fudan University, Xiamen 361006, China. Email: liu.xuan@zsxmhospital.com

## Abstract

Studies have reported variable effects of sex hormones on serious diseases. Severe disease and mortality rates in COVID-  19 show marked gender differences that may be related to sex hormones. Sex hormones regulate the expression of the viral receptors ACE2 and TMPRSS2, which affect the extent of viral infection and consequently cause variable outcomes. In addition, sex hormones have complex regulatory mechanisms that affect the immune response to viruses. These hormones also affect metabolism, leading to visceral obesity and severe disease can result from complications such as thrombosis. This review presents the latest researches on the regulatory functions of hormones in viral receptors, immune responses, complications as well as their role in COVID-  19 progression. It also discusses the therapeutic possibilities of these hormones by reviewing the recent findings of clinical and assay studies.

## KEYWORDS

COVID-  19, gender, hormone, immune response, SARS-  CoV-  2

## 1   INTRODUCTION |

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-  19) pandemic, triggered by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-  CoV-  2), has led to over 6 million fatalities globally (https://  coron  avirus.  jhu.  edu/ map.  html).  Researches  have  highlighted  significant  gender-  based disparities in the mortality and critical illness rates due to COVID-  19. Early data from the China CDC revealed that men had a higher fatality rate (2.8%) in comparison to women (1.7%).  This observation 1 has  been  consistently  validated  by  further  population-  wide  studies  and  meta-  analyses.  Despite  no  evident  difference  in  infection rates between genders according to a worldwide meta-  analysis of

3,111,714 cases, data showed that men are significantly more likely to require intensive care unit (ICU) admission (odds ratio, OR = 2.84) and face a higher death risk (OR = 1.39). 2 Moreover, a cohort study of 18,647 patients found that male gender (adjusted odds ratio, aOR 1.896) and age (aOR 1.065) were associated with increased risks of ICU admission and all-  cause mortality.  Interestingly, observational 3 studies have also pointed out that asymptomatic pregnant women with  COVID-  19  tended  to  develop  more  severe  symptoms  in  the postpartum period, aligning with the substantial hormonal fluctuations following childbirth. 4,5 Furthermore, the association between gender and the outcomes of COVID-  19 was found to vary with age. In the prepubertal age group, there was no discernible difference in

Haiqing Xiao and Jiayi Wei were authors contributed equally to this work.

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.

|

|

the risk of infection or mortality between girls and boys. However, in the adult premenopausal age group, females exhibited a significantly higher risk of infection than males in the same five-  year age strata. However, in peri- and postmenopausal females, the ratio was found to have changed once more, with infection susceptibility converging with that of males.  Aging, childbirth and menopause bring 6 about substantial alterations in sex hormones, believed to be contributing to the sex differences observed for COVID-  19 severity. In line with this hypothesis, there is a relationship among SARS-  CoV-  2 exposed men with complications of COVID-  19 with metabolic and sex hormone imbalances. 7,8 A  cohort study illustrated that testosterone, estradiol (E2) and insulin-  like growth factor 1 (IGF-  1) levels, regulated by sex hormone signalling, in blood serum, correlate with disease severity in COVID-  19 patients.  Additionally, a study focus9 ing on Gender Dysphoria (GD) patients found that female-  to-  male (FtM)  individuals  undergoing  testosterone  treatment  had  a  3.46 times  greater  infection  rate  than  male-  to-  female  (MtF)  individuals receiving E2 and anti-  androgens therapy. 10 The finding provided additional evidence for the hypothesis that sex hormones contribute to susceptibility to and progression of COVID-  19. Indeed, the critical impacts of sex hormones on infectious and immune-  related diseases has been underscored by numerous studies, 11-13 and with the advent of the COVID-  19 crisis, it has garnered increased research interest. An expanding body of evidences suggest that gonadal hormonal  influences,  particularly  E2,  progesterone  and  testosterone, may  underlie  sex  differences  in  COVID-  19,  although  results  from these studies have not been uniform.

The  review  presents  the  latest  researches  on  the  regulatory functions of hormones in viral receptors, immune response and complications as well as their role in COVID-  19 progression (Figure 1). It also discusses the potential therapeutic applications of these hormones based on recent findings in the clinic.

## 2   SEX HORMONES AND COVID-   19 |

## 2.1    Androgens and COVID-  19 severity |

Recent  researches  have  suggested  that  initial  levels  of  androgens might correlate with unfavourable outcomes in COVID-  19 patients. In  a  prospective  cohort  study  comprising  66  men  with  severe COVID-  19 and 24 men with less severe disease, researchers quantified patients' testosterone concentrations at the initial visit to the clinic and identified that patients with severe COVID-  19 exhibited significantly lower baseline testosterone levels compared to those with  milder  symptoms  (53 ng/dL  vs.  151 ng/dL).   The  comparisons 9 were adjusted for age, body mass index (BMI), race, smoking history, and comorbidities at baseline.  However, another study found 9 a  significant  positive  association  between  serum  total  testosterone levels measured several years before exposure to SARS-  CoV-  2 and the risk of death from COVID-  19 after adjusting for confounding  variables  such  as  lifestyle,  underlying  diseases  and  other  variables. 14 Other large cohort multicentre studies have also shown that

X

I

A

O

.

exogenous  lowering  of  testosterone  levels  is  beneficial  in  relieving  severe  COVID-  19  disease.  In  a  retrospective  study  conducted by Montopoli et al. on the pathology of 9280 patients with SARSCoV-  2 infection in 68 hospitals, it was found that that patients with prostate  cancer  undergoing  androgen  suppression  therapy  (ADT) showed a reduction in infection rates compared to their counterparts not on ADT (OR 4.05; 95% CI 1.55 ~ 10.59). 15 Long-  term treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) with 5-  alpha reductase inhibitors (5ARIs) has also been associated with a reduction in recurrence and mortality in male patients with COVID-  19. 16 Yet, evidence from clinical trials regarding the efficacy of ADT in critical COVID-  19 cases remains scarce. A randomized clinical trial was conducted to evaluate the efficacy of a hormonal intervention for the treatment of severe COVID-  19 disease in veterans. The trial involved 96 patients  at  14  hospitals,  who  were  randomly  assigned  to  receive  either  degarelix  (a  single  subcutaneous  dose  of  240 mg)  or  a  saline placebo intervention. The results demonstrated that there was no statistically significant difference between patients in the degarelix and placebo groups (30.6% vs. 26.5%; p = 0.67). Treatment with the anti-  androgenic agent degarelix failed to alleviate COVID-  19 severity. 17 Likewise, a randomized phase 2 clinical trial of enzalutamide for  the  treatment  of  COVID-  19  included  42  patients  hospitalized with  COVID-  19  prior  to  safety  assessment.  The  trial  was  terminated  early  due  to  the  finding  that  enzalutamide-  treated  patients required longer hospital stays (hazard ratio, HR for discharge 0.43, 95% CI 0.20 ~ 0.93). 18 In fact, diminished serum testosterone might signal  organ  compromise and the overall prognosis for individuals infected with SARS-  CoV-  2, reflecting the endocrine profile of those in critical condition. 19 Observational studies have underscored a significant reduction in testosterone levels among critically ill males in comparison to those less severely affected. In a prospective cohort study, testosterone, E2 and IGF-  1 concentrations were measured on the day of consultation and on days 3, 7, 14 and 28 after admission. Testosterone levels dropped by 64.9% upon hospital admission, with a further decline of 84.1% observed within the subsequent 3 days. 9 In a prospective cohort study of 358 COVID-  19 patients published last year, patients underwent venous serum collection on the first day of their visit. Venous serum samples were obtained from each patient diagnosed with COVID-  19 in a tube of at least 5 mL on the first day of hospitalization. Patients requiring ICU treatment showed lower testosterone levels compared to non-  ICU patients (64 ng/dL vs. 286 ng/dL). 20 Although some studies have shown conflicting results, it may be due to confounding factors such as race and age of the  study  population,  as  well  as  experimental  design  such  as  correction factors and sample size. Overall, these studies suggest that higher baseline androgen levels and lower testosterone levels in patients at disease onset are associated with organ damage and poorer prognosis.  However,  clinical  trials  of  anti-  androgen  therapy  have not shown favourable results, which may be related to the complex mechanism of action, drug dosage, and patient population, among other factors. Therefore, more in-  depth studies are needed to investigate the mechanisms associated with the effects of testosterone and severe COVID-  19 disease.

X

<!-- image -->

I

A

O

.

FIGURE 1 Effects of sex hormones on the course of severe COVID-  19. (A) Potential effects of sex hormones on SARS-  CoV-  2 infection by affecting the expression of viral entry receptors. Both testosterone, estradiol and progesterone impact the viral entry receptors ACE2 (1) and TMPRSS2 (2), with testosterone reported to increase ACE2 expression and progesterone reported to decrease ACE2 expression. (B) Sex hormones potentially modulate a wide range of immune cells, which may lead to differences in immune responses to viruses in hosts of different sexes. This fragment describes the innate immune response (3-7) and the adaptive immune response (8-9), both of which have been reported to be affected by estradiol. However, the direction of the effect is controversial. Additionally, testosterone has been shown to suppress the T-  cell response. (C) The impact of sex hormones on complications such as ARDS, coronary heart disease and VAT. Estradiol has been found to have an effect on the development of ARDS, but different reports have shown inconsistent conclusions regarding the direction (10). Additionally, estradiol has been reported to inhibit coronary artery disease (11). Both estradiol and testosterone have been found to influence the development of VAT, but the direction of adjustment has not been consistently reported (12). Key events affecting the prognosis of COVID-  19 are illustrated in the figure (1). The sex hormones that affect the events are listed in parentheses. Upward (downward) arrows indicate promotion (downregulation) of these events by the sex hormone. Sex hormones without arrows have been reported to have an impact on the event, but different reports draw different conclusions and are inconclusive. Angiotensin-  converting enzyme 2 (ACE2); TMPRSS2, transmembrane protease serine 2; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; VAT, visceral adiposity.

<!-- image -->

## 2.2    E2 and COVID-  19 severity |

Researches  have  demonstrated  that  E2  is  associated  with  inflammation levels in scenarios involving acute infectious diseases, significantly influencing both innate and adaptive immune responses. 21 In  a  retrospective study of 1902 female COVID-  19 patients, researchers analysed the association between menstrual status, sex hormones and immuneinflammation-  related  cytokines  and  disease  prognosis  in  COVID-  19 patients. 22 Anti-  Müllerian hormone (AMH) and E2 might be considered possible  preventive  agents  against  the  severity  of  COVID-  19,  showing a negative correlation. 22 Multiple studies have provided evidences that supplemental oestrogen confers a protective effect on COVID-  19 in postmenopausal females, with particular emphasis on the effectiveness of E2.  Electronic health records were used to analyse age-  related 6 sex  differences  in  a  large  international  COVID-  19  cohort  of  68,466 cases. The results showed that the risk of death was reduced by more than 50% in women under 50 years of age treated with E2 (OR 0.33, 95%  CI  0.18 ~ 0.62).  In  contrast,  in  younger  premenopausal  women (15 ~ 49 years),  E2  treatment  had  no  effect  on  the  risk  of  COVID-  19 death, probably because of higher endogenous E2 levels. A significant population-  based  study  further  supports  the  hypothesis  of  a  protective effect of E2 in COVID-  19. In women ≥50 years of age, antiestrogen

therapies  (AETs)  decreased  the  occurrence  of  serious  COVID-  19 in patients suffering from hormone-  driven cancers (HDCs) (adjPOR = 0.66;90% CI: 0.48 ~ 0.91). 23 However, no significant associations with SARS-  CoV-  2 infection, hospitalization or death were found in all patients with HDCs receiving AETs. In a retrospective cohort study, sex hormone levels (E2 and testosterone) were recorded in male and female COVID-  19 patients ( n = 50) admitted to the ICU and compared with nonCOVID-  19 control patients ( n = 42) admitted to the ICU. Testosterone levels were significantly lower in critically ill male COVID-  19 patients compared  to  controls.  However,  it's  worth  noting  that  sex  hormone values among severely affected women with COVID-  19 did not show statistically  significant  differences  compared  to  female  patients  with mild disease, but a similar trend towards higher E2 levels was observed. 8 The phenomenon can be attributed in part to the complexity of E2 and COVID-  19  interactions,  reflecting  the  interplay  among  different  subtypes of E2, age, and reproductive status. In these studies, E2 levels which were too low seemed to be associated with a poor prognosis for COVID-  19 in older women or men. In contrast, E2 was not significantly associated with COVID-  19 prognosis when younger women were included, which may be related to the higher baseline levels in younger women. These results therefore indicate that excessively low E2 levels appear to be associated with poor prognosis in COVID-  19.

|

## 2.3    Progesterone and COVID-  19 severity |

Progesterone,  a  vital  steroid  hormone,  is  crucial  for  maintaining pregnancies in  female  and  is  also  produced  and  functions  in  males. Progesterone exhibits various functions including reducing leukocyte activation, mitigating pro-  inflammatory mediator production, regulating T-  cell differentiation, contributing to neurodevelopment and exerting anti-  inflammatory effects. It has been recognized as essential for facilitating rapid recovery from influenza A virus infection, prompting discussions about its potential benefits in immune dysregulation during SARS-  CoV-  2 infection. Data from a clinical trial in 2021 revealed that administering progesterone subcutaneously (100 mg subcutaneously twice daily for up to 5 days) ameliorated the clinical status of 20 male  patients  severely  impacted  by  SARS-  CoV-  2. 24 Compared  with controls, patients in the progesterone group had an overall improvement in mean clinical status score of 1.5 points on a 7-  point rating scale from baseline to day 7. 24 Support for this theory is further enhanced by experimental research, which suggested that progesterone, given  in  a  dose-  responsive  manner,  can  counteract  weight  loss  and mitigate severe pneumonia in hamsters infected with SARS-  CoV-  2. 25 Furthermore, recent statistics from China on 118 cases of COVID-  19 pregnant  women  revealed  that  the  gravest  instances  of  COVID-  19 among pregnant women are more likely postpartum, a period marked by a swift decrease in progesterone levels. 26 Analysis from the U.S. Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)'s  tracking  database showed, among 8207 early-  stage female pregnancies during an outbreak, adjusted for age, underlying disease and ethnicity, pregnant patients had an increased likelihood of experiencing severe disease, although the risk of death was similar to that of non-  pregnant women. 27 However, one smaller independent study has reported that pregnancy does not have a negative impact on COVID-  19 outcomes in pregnant women exposed to SARS-  CoV-  2. 28 The result may be related to the small sample size. Overall, the evidence from these studies suggested that excessively low progesterone may be associated with a poor prognosis for COVID-  19. Both animal studies and clinical trials suggest that progesterone supplementation in men with low progesterone levels may improve the severe symptoms of COVID-  19. However, the results were not consistent across studies. Potential explanations for this include inconsistencies in the ethnicity of the study populations, sample sizes, and grading criteria for severe disease. Therefore, the effect of progesterone on COVID-  19 severity needs to be further investigated in randomized controlled trials with larger samples.

## 3   SEX HORMONES AND EXPRESSION | OF VIRAL RECEPTORS

## 3.1    ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in COVID-  19 infections |

SARS-  CoV-  2,  the  virus  responsible  for  COVID-  19,  is  an  enveloped RNA virus with spike glycoproteins (S-  proteins) on the surface. To infiltrate  host  cells,  SARS-  CoV-  2  depends  on  surface  proteins  of human respiratory tract epithelial cells, notably the transmembrane

X

I

A

O

.

serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) and ACE2 29,30 (Figure 1). The activation and subsequent cleavage of S-  proteins by TMPRSS2 are criticalfor the fusion of the viral envelope and the cell membrane of the host. 31 As a type I transmembrane glycoprotein with carboxypeptidase activity, ACE2 facilitates intracellular entry. These proteins exhibit varying expression levels across tissues. 32

During the progression of SARS-  CoV-  2 infection, elevated ACE2 levels  could  facilitate  the  entry  of  the  virus  into  the  body,  potentially  leading  to  organ  damage.  Research  has  indicated  that  eliminating  TMPRSS2 from the respiratory system impacted the initial infection site and viral dissemination in the airways, consequently diminishing  lung  pathology  in  SARS-  CoV  and  MERS-  CoV  cases. 33 Several  inhibitors  of  TMPRSS2  have  been  pinpointed  as  effective in  blocking  the  ingress  of  SARS-  CoV-  2  in  vitro. 34 Researches suggested that TMPRSS2 and similarly functioning proteases mediate SARS-  CoV-  2 transmission through the upper respiratory tract, while the transmission might be obstructed by the administration of camostat mesylate. 35 In the realm of clinical investigations, patients with COVID-  19 who received treatment with camostat mesylate, a serine protease inhibitor, experienced symptom relief and faster recovery of taste and smell sensation compared to other groups. 36 However, a randomized trial found that adding a nafamostat to the standard care regimen did not reduce the treatment duration, while a minor fraction of patients at high risk of severe COVID-  19, who required oxygen therapy, showed accelerated recovery. 37 Indeed, TMPRSS2 relies on ACE2 for its functional activity in viral fusion. A case-control study found that the TMPRSS2/ACE2 ratio was more effective than ACE2 alone in predicting COVID-  19 severity. 38

## 3.2    Sex-  specific expression of TMPRSS2 and | ACE2

Currently, there is no unified agreement on the variances in ACE2 expression  levels  between  genders.  Previous  research  has  suggested that  gene  expression  of  ACE2  might  be  more  prevalent  in males than in  females,  particularly  within  lung  epithelial  cells  and airway  smooth  muscle  (ASM)  cells. 39,40 However,  other  studies have reported similar ACE2 expression levels across various tissues in  both  genders. 41,42 The  debate  extends  to  TMPRSS2 expression levels  in  men  versus  women. Meta-  analysis of single-  cell data has revealed that TMPRSS2 expression is higher in AT1 cells of males than in females, 43 though this difference is not observed in AT2 cells, which are primary targets for SARS-  CoV-  2 infection. Furthermore, subsequent research has not identified any notable differences in TMPRSS2  expression  within  lung  tissues  between  the  two  genders. 44,45 The  genes  for  ACE2  and  angiotensin  II  receptor  2  are situated on the X chromosome. In females, to preserve genetic equilibrium,  one  X  chromosome is inactivated at the blastocyst stage, but specific genes, including those coding for ACE2 and angiotensin II receptor 2, bypass this inactivation process. 46,47 Additionally, studies using rat models have demonstrated that the SRY gene family, present on the Y chromosome in males, contributes to the enhanced

X

I

A

O

.

activation  of  renin-  angiotensin-  aldosterone system  (RAAS)  elements, thus inhibiting the activation of the ACE2 promoter. 48

## 3.3    Regulation of TMPRSS2 and ACE2 by | sex hormones

However,  hormonal  factors  can  also  impact  gender-  specific  disparities  in  TMPRSS2  and  ACE2  expression  and  activity  (Table  1). Genomic data analysis showed that E2 enhances ACE2 expression in  thymus  cells  from  mice  and  adenocarcinoma  cells  from  human lung epithelium. 49 Mononuclear macrophages were collected from 10 congestive heart failure (CHF) patients before and after 1 month of treatment  with  Mineralocorticoid  receptor  blockade  (MRB) (25 mg/d).  MRB  suppress  proinflammatory  genes  in  patients  with CHF while simultaneously increasing ACE2 mRNA expression and activity (increase of 300% and 654%). 50 Nevertheless, in experimental studies, alveoli cells were treated with estrogenic molecules or the  glycosylation  inhibitor  clindamycin  (0.2 μ M)  under  physiological conditions for 24 h. The result indicated that E2 disrupt glycanglycan  interactions  and  glycan-  protein  interactions  between  the human ACE2 and the SARS-  CoV-  2 thereby blocking its entry into cells. 51 Furthermore, additional experimental studies treated human bronchial  epithelial  (NHBE)  cells  with  E2. 52 E2  suppresses  ACE2

expression without affecting TMPRSS2 expression. 52 An  observational study of prostate cancer patients demonstrated that prostate carcinoma containing the TMPRSS2-  ERG fusion gene may respond to E2 signalling. 53 Treatment with 17 β -  E2 on VERO E6 cells results in a decrease in the TMPRSS2 mRNA levels, consequently lowering intracellular viral load of SARS-  CoV-  2, while ACE2 mRNA was not affected in these cells. 54 Progesterone exhibited greater efficacy in reducing ACE2 mRNA expression in human uterine tissue compared to E2 treatment. 55

ADT  has  believed  to  provide  protective  effects  by  inhibiting SARS-  CoV-  2 entry into lung epithelial cells. 41 Study has confirmed that testosterone increases ACE2 expression. Researchers investigated the regulation of ACE2 expression by oestrogen and testosterone using primary human ASM cells isolated from normal men and women as a model. Exposure to testosterone for 24 h elevated ACE2 levels  in  exposed  human  airway  epithelium  from  both  genders. 40 A  recent  comprehensive  screening  of  nearly  1500  FDA-  approved drugs  aimed  to  identify  compounds  reducing  ACE2  levels  in  normal cell cultures. Treatment with antiandrogen drugs reduced ACE2 expression in cardiomyocytes derived from stem cells and shields pulmonary organs from SARS-  CoV-  2 infection.  Additionally, in an 7 animal  experiment,  the  researchers  took  lungs  from  female  and male mice treated with a control diet or Enz for 10 days and analysed protein and mRNA expression. In mice lungs treated with the

TABLE 1 Regulation of TMPRSS2 and ACE2 expression by sex hormones.

| Viral receptor    | Sex hormone-  related treatment     | Primary findings                                                                                                                       | Tissue or cell type                                                        | References   |
|-------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
| ACE2              | Antiandrogen  enzalutamide          | Decreases ACE2 expression                                                                                                              | Heart cells and pulmonary  tissue derived from human  embryonic stem cells | 7            |
|                   |                                     | Reducing TMPRSS2 expression                                                                                                            | Human lung cells                                                           | 56           |
|                   |                                     | Moderately reduces ACE2                                                                                                                | Mouse lung                                                                 | 45           |
|                   | Testosterone                        | Increase ACE2 expression                                                                                                               | Mouse kidney                                                               | 49           |
|                   | Oestrogen                           | Increases ACE2 expression                                                                                                              | Mouse thymus                                                               | 49           |
|                   |                                     | Reduced ACE2 glycosylation                                                                                                             | Mouse model                                                                | 51           |
|                   |                                     | Regulates the expression of SARS-  CoV-  2 receptor  ACE2 in differentiated airway epithelial cells                                    | Female airway epithelial cells                                             | 52           |
|                   | Mineralocorticoid  receptor blocker | ACE2 activity and mRNA expression increased                                                                                            | Human macrophage cells                                                     | 50           |
|                   | Progesterone                        | Induced ACE2 mRNA expression more than oestrogen                                                                                       | Mouse uteri                                                                | 55           |
| TMPRSS2           | Antagonist                          | Did not decrease pulmonary TMPRSS2                                                                                                     | Mouse lung                                                                 | 45           |
|                   | enzalutamide                        | Reduced TMPRSS2 levels                                                                                                                 | Mouse airway epithelial cells                                              | 58           |
|                   | Leuprolide or  Estradiol            | In males treated with leuprolide or estradiol, TMPRSS2  levels were markedly lower                                                     | Human epithelial cells                                                     | 57           |
|                   | ERbeta agonist                      | Expression of TMPRSS2-  ERG decreased after ERbeta  agonist treatment                                                                  | Human prostate cancer cells                                                | 53           |
| ACE2 and  TMPRSS2 | Androgen                            | Decreased TMPRSS2 and ACE2 expression in lung  epithelial cells                                                                        | Mouse lung epithelial cells                                                | 40,41        |
|                   | Castration                          | Reduced levels of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in lung, seminal  vesicles and small intestine; ACE2 upregulated in  kidney tissue, but not TMPRSS2 | Mouse systemic                                                             | 56           |

|

potent anti-  androgen enzalutamide, a modest decline in ACE2 gene expression  was  noted. 45 Moreover,  androgen  deprivation  through antiandrogen treatments via depot or in vitro methods leaded to decreased expression of both TMPRSS2 and ACE2 transcripts and proteins in humans. 56 TMPRSS2 is high in the human prostate tissue and levels increase in response to androgens through targeted androgen receptor expression (r2 = 0.39; p &lt; 0.001). 57 Treatment with the antiandrogen drug enzalutamide reduced TMPRSS2 levels in human and mouse lungs and significantly reduced SARS-  CoV-  2 entry into lung cells and infection. 58 Nonetheless, in animal experiments, following enzalutamide treatment, TMPRSS2 expression remained unchanged in  mouse lungs. 45 In  conclusion,  these  investigations  indicate  that the complex interactions between sex hormones and the expression of ACE2 and TMPRESS2 appear to vary depending on the specific organ or environment. The regulation of ACE2 and TMPRESS2 by sex hormones remains inconclusive and requires further study.

## 4   SEX HORMONES AND IMMUNE | RESPONSES

## 4.1    Cytokine storm |

SARS-  CoV-  2  infection  triggered  the  development  of  immune  responses, leading to dysregulated innate inflammation and compromised adaptive immunity in critically ill patients. This dysregulation may result in a cytokine storm, as demonstrated by the significant increase in pro-  inflammatory cytokines in patient serum, including IL6, IL-  1 β , IL-  2, IL-  8, IL-  17, G-  CSF, GM-  CSF, IP10, MCP1, CCL3 and TNF (Figure 1). The cytokine storm may further induce respiratory failure, multiple organ failure and even shock. It is also associated with significant neutrophil and monocyte infiltrates, resulting in extensive damage to the alveoli, characterized by the formation of hyalinization and alveolar wall thickness. Ultimately, the immune-  mediated damage extended to conditions such as splenic atrophy and lymph node necrosis, which have been observed in deceased patients. 59

## 4.2    Gender differences in immune responses |

Significant sex disparities exist in both innate and adaptive immune responses. Typically, females exhibit stronger immune responses to pathogens than males. The sexual dimorphism arises from several factors.  Firstly,  experimental  animal  studies  have  demonstrated that females possess a greater count of most leukocyte subpopulations,  such  as  plasmacytoid  dendritic  cells  (pDCs). 60-62 Females demonstrate heightened activity of cytotoxic T-  cells 63 and elevated levels  of  immunoglobulins. 64 Conversely,  male  COVID-  19  patients often have lower lymphocyte counts, elevated neutrophil to leukocyte ratios, and higher levels of C-  reactive plasma protein in serum than their female counterparts. 65 It has been noted that female patients with viral infections tend to display a more robust cytokine response, while male patients infected with SARS-  CoV-  2 often show

X

I

A

O

.

frequently have higher levels of pro-  inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-  8. This variance in cytokine response might play a role in the poorer prognosis of COVID-  19 cases in males. Additionally, T-  cell activation tends to be subdued in males, which correlates with adverse outcomes in COVID-  19 patients.

## 4.3    Sex hormones and the immune response |

Discrepancies  in circulating sex hormone  levels  may  underlie gender-  related responses to infections. E2 enhances the expression of genes crucial for the activation and longevity of B cells, including cd22, shp-  1, bcl-  2, and vcam-  1, thus enhancing immune system responses. 66,67 However, in the mouse model, testosterone appeared to inhibit the recruitment of eosinophils and neutrophils and reduce the production of IgE. 68

Additionally, sex hormones  significantly influence cytokine production,  leading  to  gender-  specific  variations  in  immune  reactions. Numerous studies have illustrated that E2 enhances toll-  like receptor  7  (TLR7)-  mediated  type  I  IFN  responses  in  pDCs. 69 In  a clinical trial, postmenopausal women treated with E2 exhibited an increased production of IFN-   and TNF-   by pDCs following TLR7 α α and  TLR9  stimulation. 69 Furthermore,  ovariectomized  mice  produced less IFN-    and  TNF-    by  the  pDCs  after  TLR7  stimulation, α α which correlated with E2 receptor expression in the haematopoietic compartment of mice. 69 In addition, other studies have shown that E2's influence on pDC differentiation, the promotion of transcription  factors  IRF4  and  IRF5,  and  an  enhanced  prevalence  of  pDCs generating IFN-   and TNF-   post-  TLR activation. The elimination of α α E2 receptors in mouse pDCs was found to lower Irf5 mRNA expression and reduce the proportion of pDCs secreting IFN-  /IFN-  . α β 70,71 Additionally, in vitro experiments have shown that treating human pDCs with dihydrotestosterone (DHT) diminishes IFN-   output in α reaction to TLR7 activation. 72 Type III  IFN exhibits more localized activity at mucosal sites than type I IFN, avoiding widespread inflammatory processes. 73 Furthermore, studies have demonstrated that E2 deprivation inhibits IFN-   and IL-  17 production by CD4 γ + T cells while increasing systemic levels of Tregs. 74 Increasing estradiol concentrations in vitro promoted the switch of naïve CD4 T cells into + Th1 cells; high physiological estradiol concentrations dampening Th1 responses, promoted Tregs, and prolonged graft survival. Moreover, as a major activator of macrophages, IFN-   has received increasing γ attention  from  researchers.  A  retrospective  analysis  of  COVID-  19 patients,  examining  27  cytokines/chemokines,  uncovered  a  direct link  between IFN-   and E2 levels, unlike with testosterone levels. γ In summary, these gender-  related differences extend from innate to adaptive immunity and are influenced by the interplay of intrinsic and adaptive immune factors, often linked to sex hormone levels.

Sex  hormone  levels  can  affect  the  immune  response,  thus potentially influencing the effectiveness of the anti-  SARS-  CoV-  2 vaccine.  A  study  investigated  the  immune  responses  to  mRNA vaccination among pregnant, lactating, and non-  pregnant women. A  deep  sequencing  analysis  was  conducted  on  humoral  vaccine

X

I

A

O

.

responses in a cohort of pregnant women, lactating women, and age-  matched  non-  pregnant  controls.  It  revealed  that  pregnant or  lactating  women  required  two  vaccine  doses  to  achieve  immune responses comparable to those of non-  pregnant women. 75 Furthermore, an investigation of immunological reactions following mRNA vaccination found a significantly elevated anti-  S/RBD response  in  female  healthcare  workers  (HCWs)  post  COVID-  19 vaccination. It was noted that females experienced a pronounced and quicker reduction in this response over time when compared to males. Moreover, an intriguing positive association was discovered  between  the  levels  of  plasma  testosterone  in  male  HCWs and increased anti-  S levels, hinting at a potential gender-  specific biomarker in males. 76 These findings provided a conceptual framework for disease prevention and vaccine development targeting high-  risk populations.

## 4.4    Regulation of disease by sex hormones | through immunization

Gender-  related disparities in sex hormone-  induced immune responses significantly impact COVID-  19 patient out-  comes (Table 2). A 2021 study examined plasma sex hormones (testosterone  and  17 β -  estradiol),  sex  hormone-  dependent  circulating  molecules (ACE2 and angiotensin 1-7), and other known biomarkers of COVID-  19 severity at admission in male and female patients with COVID-  19.  The  plasma  biomarker  levels  were  analysed  in  an  aggregated and sex-  disaggregated form in relation to the severity of ARDS on admission and the occurrence of respiratory deterioration during hospitalization. The results found that upon hospital admission, male patients suffering from COVID-  19 who exhibited lower

<!-- image -->

levels of plasma testosterone and lymphocytes were more likely to experience more severe ARDS and a deteriorating condition postadmission. 77 Several  studies  have  been  conducted  to  investigate the efficacy of antiandrogenic compounds, including dutasteridea  5 α -  reductase  inhibitor  prescribed  for  treating  BPH  and  alopecia-and proxalutamide, a blocker of the androgen receptor. These studies have similarly probed immune-  related responses. The studies shown that compared to a placebo, these agents expedite viral elimination, diminish viral shedding, and reduce C-  reactive protein levels in patients with mild to moderate COVID-  19 symptoms. 78,79 The disparate outcomes observed in these studies may be attributed to variations in the immune responses elicited. A 2022 multicenter  trial  evaluated  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  raloxifene  in the treatment of adult patients with mild to moderate COVID-  19. Participants were randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive oral placebo,  raloxifene  60 mg,  or  raloxifene  120 mg  (self-  administered) for  up  to  2 weeks.  The  results  found  that  raloxifene,  a  specific E2 receptor modulator, increased white blood cell count and accelerated viral  clearance  among  SARS-  CoV-  2-  infected  patients. 80 Nevertheless,  due  to  operational  difficulties,  the  study  was  discontinued  during  the  phase  2  study  segment. 80 Furthermore, testosterone  and  E2  may  not  be  the  standalone  factor  influencing  adverse  outcomes in  patients  with  COVID-  19,  given  that  sex hormones can be interconverted. A retrospective study in symptomatic  men  indicated  that  diminished  total  serum  testosterone levels  coupled  with  an  elevated  oestrogen/testosterone  ratio-a marker for systemic inflammation correlated with a heightened risk of mortality while hospitalized. 81 The study corrected for a number of  major  confounders,  including  age,  BMI,  hypertension  and  cardiovascular disease, diabetes and malignancy. Furthermore, there is evidence indicating that progesterone may affect the observed

TABLE 2 Regulation of COVID-  19 by sex hormones.

| Type of study                    | Sex hormone-  related  treatment              | Species and  sex   | Primary findings                                                                                                                                                                                                           |   References |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
| Randomized controlled  trial     | Raloxifene                                    | Male/ Female       | Increased white blood cell counts and accelerated viral  clearing                                                                                                                                                          |           80 |
| Experimental research            | Progesterone                                  | Male               | Inhibit proinflammatory cytokine overproduction and viral  replication in lung                                                                                                                                             |           25 |
| Experimental research            | Progesterone                                  | Mice               | Triggers downstream antiviral genes, stimulating cellular as  well as mouse innate antiviral response                                                                                                                      |           82 |
| Experimental research            | Testosterone                                  | Male/female        | Angiotensin1-  7 plasma levels and neutrophil count predicted  the outcome of ARDS only in females, whereas testosterone  plasma levels and lymphocytes counts only in males                                               |           77 |
| Experimental research            | Dutasteride                                   | Male               | In males with mild COVID-  19 symptoms undergoing early  therapy with nitazoxanide and azithromycin, treatment  with dutasteride reduces viral shedding and inflammatory  markers compared to males treated with a placebo |           78 |
| Investigational study            | Androgen receptor  antagonist,  Proxalutamide | Male               | Significantly accelerated viral clearance on Day 7 in mild to  moderate COVID-  19 patients versus placebo                                                                                                                 |           79 |
| Exploratory  retrospective study | Estradiol to  testosterone ratio              | Male               | Low total testosterone levels and elevated E2/T ratio values  at admission are associated with hyperinflammatory state in  hospitalized men with COVID-  19                                                                |           81 |

|

sexual  differentiation  in  SARS-  CoV-  2  infection  rates  and  disease progression, highlighting a possible therapeutic strategy for managing COVID-  19. The study confirmed that progesterone is capable of inhibiting excessive pro-  inflammatory cytokine production and viral replication in the lung tissues of male hamsters infected with SARS-  CoV-  2. 25 Another study conducted in the same year further explored the concept, revealing that viral infection can induce somatic  progesterone  through  the  hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)  axis,  which,  in  turn,  enhances  intrinsic  antiviral  responses in cells and mice via downstream antiviral genes. 82 Observational studies and animal experiments have indicated that sex hormones may influence the prognosis of COVID-  19. However, clinical trials have not yielded conclusive results, suggesting that the relationship between sex hormones and COVID-  19 is complex.

## 5   COMPLICATIONS OF COVID-   19 |

## 5.1    Lung tissue damage |

Severe illness and death due to acute viral pneumonia progressing to  ARDS  are  common  in  patients  with  COVID-  19. 83 These  stages involve exudation and proliferation, which are characterized by hyaline  membrane  changes  and  microvascular  thrombosis,  ultimately leading  to  diffuse  alveolar  injury 84 (Figure  1).  Providing  effective treatment during these stages is crucial to improving patient prognosis  and  preventing  mortality.  Studies  on  animals  have  demonstrated that male mice that have been castrated exhibit a reduction in LPS-  induced lung injury, while female mice do not. 85 Therefore, androgens may exacerbate symptoms of lung injury and affect the prognosis of COVID-  19.

## 5.2    Cardiovascular system |

During  the  COVID-  19  pandemic,  patients  may  exhibit  a  range  of extrapulmonary symptoms, including cardiovascular issues such as myocardial dysfunction, acute coronary syndromes, and thrombosis. These issues are strongly linked to mortality and result in direct damage to cardiomyocytes, virus-  mediated endothelial injury, systemic inflammation, and hypoxia. 86 E2  is  known  for  its  protective role  in  the  vascular  system  and  might  explain  the  observed  sexbased disparities in COVID-  19 fatality rates. Research on animals has demonstrated that 17 -  estradiol offers a protective shield against β myocardial ischemia, notably diminishing the size of myocardial infarction. 87 E2  signals  directly  through  the  membrane  and  induces vasodilation by releasing nitric oxide. Furthermore, signalling of E2 receptors plays a crucial role in maintaining the structural and functional integrity of endothelial cells by blocking the pathways leading to apoptosis. 88 These findings highlighted the cardioprotective function of E2, reducing the susceptibility to COVID-  19-  related cardiac injury, endothelial inflammation, and subsequent cardiovascular complications.

X

I

A

O

.

## 5.3    Visceral adiposity |

Research consistently demonstrates a heightened potential for serious illness and increased mortality among persons with an elevated BMI. 89 For  each  1-  mm  increment  of  subcutaneous  adipose  tissue (SAT) thickness in humans, there is a 16% increase in the chance of serious  disease. 90 Adipose  tissue  expresses  ACE2  receptors,  and in  obese patients with larger fat stores, these receptors are more abundant,  intensifying  the  systemic  response  to  SARS-  CoV-  2. 91 Importantly, visceral obesity contributes to elevated levels of prothrombotic circulating factors, increasing susceptibility to thrombosis. 92 Fat distribution is also influenced by sex hormones. Knocking down E2 receptors and reducing E2 signalling  leads  to  obesity  in both male and female mice. 93 A randomized controlled trial has suggested a link between treatments involving anabolic steroids with androgenic  properties  and  an  increased  accumulation  of  visceral fat. 94 Consequently, SARS-  CoV-  2  infection  may  worsen inflammation in visceral adipose tissue (VAT).

Furthermore, the mesenteric VAT, encasing the small intestine, acts  as  a  primary  barrier  against  pathogen  migration  from  the  intestines to the circulatory system. 95 Remarkably, more than half of COVID-  19  patients  with  positive  faecal  SARS-  CoV-  2  test  results have reported gastrointestinal discomfort, indicating the virus's impact on intestinal cells. 96 Furthermore, single-  cell RNA sequencing analyses from samples of healthy individuals have revealed elevated expressions of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in the intestinal epithelium following  infection  by  SARS-  CoV-  2. 97 These  findings  suggested  that viruses  may  disrupt  the  intestinal  barrier,  triggering  an  immuneinflammatory  response  and  exacerbating  local  inflammation.  In conclusion, the outcomes of COVID-  19 are influenced to varying degrees by the complex interactions between sex hormones, immune responses, and immune metabolism.

## 6   CONCLUSIONS |

In conclusion, differences of sex hormones play a role in the observed disparities  of  SARS-  CoV-  2  outcomes  between  genders.  However, consensus is lacking in the existing evidence, and the intricate relationship  between viruses and sex hormones make it challenging to  clearly  define  how  sexual  steroids  influence  the  progression of COVID-  19. Present clinical data on the impact of sexual hormones on the mitigation of COVID-  19 do not support for the use of E2 or discontinuation  of  these  agents  in  COVID-  19  patients.  Therefore, further  prospective  trials  are  required  to  fully  grasp  the  enduring influence of sex hormones on the progression of COVID-  19. Several relevant trials have delved into how sex hormones affect multiple facets of COVID-  19, including their role in the regulation of ACE2 and TMPRSS2, immune reactions, and the risk of developing complications  such  as  heart  disease.  However,  these  reports  yield  inconsistent  findings,  and  a  thorough  exploration  of  the  underlying mechanisms  and  hypotheses  is  required,  utilizing  advanced  analytical methods such as multi-  omics. In addition, research focusing

X

I

A

O

.

on  the  impact  of  sex  hormones  across  different  strains  of  SARSCoV-  2 is  scant. Lastly, the influence of sociocultural gender on an individual's life experiences, immunization awareness, and medical conditions indirectly affects COVID-  19 outcomes. Therefore, studying both biological and socio-  cultural gender differences is crucial to enhance our understanding and management of the pandemic.

The  outcomes  of  these  animal  experiments  or  observational studies support the prospect of clinical translation of sex hormones. In  addition,  several  studies  reviewed  in  this  article  demonstrate the impact of sex and age stratification on outcomes. These results serve  as  a  reminder  of  the  importance  of  stratifying  populations for  age,  sex,  etc.,  in  the  design  of  clinical  trials.  However,  there  is currently no evidence to support the use of oestradiol or the discontinuation of androgens in patients with COVID-  19 in the reports of clinical studies of the effect of sex hormones on COVID-  19 regression. The expected effects of clinical trials include a significant reduction in the risk of patient death after sex hormone intervention in critically ill patients with COVID-  19 compared with the placebo group. Nevertheless, there may be potential risks, including the possibility that the intervention may have the opposite effect or that the sex  hormone  intervention  group  may  experience  adverse  effects. Several current research clinical trials  have  been  terminated early due to failure to achieve the expected outcomes or the development of side effects, which is in line with ethical considerations. However, the  dosage  of  sex  hormone  therapy  may  also  affect  the  outcome of the disease due to species differences as well as individual differences,  which  may  also  be  a  significant  challenge  in  the  clinical translation of sex hormones. Due to ethical constraints, it was not possible to explore dosage in humans. Consequently, there is a need to  develop  relevant  algorithms  to  translate  doses  from  animals  to humans, which could significantly advance the clinical translation of sex hormones.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Haiqing Xiao: Investigation (lead); visualization (lead); writing - original draft (lead). Jiayi Wei: Investigation (lead); visualization (equal); writing -original draft (lead). Lunzhi  Yuan: Conceptualization (supporting);  visualization  (supporting). Jiayuan  Li: Investigation (supporting);  writing  -  original  draft  (supporting). Chang  Zhang: Investigation  (supporting);  visualization  (supporting);  writing  -  review and editing (supporting). Gang Liu: Conceptualization (equal); investigation (lead);  project  administration  (lead);  writing  -  review and editing (equal). Xuan Liu: Conceptualization (lead); funding acquisition (lead); project administration (lead); writing - review and editing (equal).

## FUNDING INFORMATION

This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32201152,  81925019,  U1705281,  U22A20333),  the Major State Basic Research Development Program of China (2017YFA0205201),  the  Fundamental  Research  Funds  for  the Central Universities (20720190088, 20720200019), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University, China (NCET-  13-  0502),

<!-- image -->

Shenzhen Natural Science Foundation (JCYJ20220530143407016). The funders had no role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

All data is referred to in the references.

## ORCID

Gang Liu

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2613-7286

Xuan Liu https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4385-7085

## REFERENCES

- 1. The Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team. The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (COVID-  19) China, 2020. China CDC Weekly . 2020;2:113-122.
- 2. Peckham  H,  de  Gruijter  NM,  Raine  C,  et  al.  Male  sex  identified  by  global  COVID-  19  meta-  analysis  as  a  risk  factor  for  death and  ITU  admission. Nat  Commun . 2020;11:6317.  doi:10.1038/ s41467-  020-  19741-  6
- 3. Cardoso  FS,  Papoila  AL,  Machado  RS,  Fidalgo  P.  Age,  sex,  and comorbidities  predict  ICU  admission  or  mortality  in  cases  with SARS-  CoV2 infection: a population-  based cohort study. Crit Care . 2020;24:465. doi:10.1186/s13054-  020-  03173-  1
- 4. Breslin N, Baptiste C, Miller R, et al. Coronavirus disease 2019 in pregnancy:  early  lessons. Am  J  Obstet  Gynecol . 2020;2:100111. doi:10.1016/j.ajogmf.2020.100111
- 5. Breslin  N,  Baptiste  C,  Gyamfi-  Bannerman  C,  et  al.  Coronavirus disease  2019  infection  among  asymptomatic  and  symptomatic pregnant  women:  two  weeks  of  confirmed  presentations  to  an affiliated  pair  of  new  York  City  hospitals. Am  J  Obstet  Gynecol . 2020;2:100118. doi:10.1016/j.ajogmf.2020.100118
- 6. Seeland  U,  Coluzzi  F,  Simmaco  M,  et  al.  Evidence  for  treatment with  estradiol  for  women  with  SARS-  CoV-  2  infection. BMC Med . 2020;18:369. doi:10.1186/s12916-  020-  01851-  z
- 7. Samuel  RM,  Majd  H,  Richter  MN,  et  al.  Androgen  signaling  regulates  SARS-  CoV-  2  receptor  levels  and  is  associated  with  severe COVID-  19 symptoms in men. Cell Stem Cell . 2020;27:876-889.e812. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2020.11.009
- 8. Schroeder M, Schaumburg B, Mueller Z, et al. High estradiol and low testosterone levels are associated with critical illness in male but not in female COVID-  19 patients: a retrospective cohort study. Emerging Microbes &amp; Infections . 2021;10:1807-1818. doi:10.1080/2 2221751.2021.1969869
- 9. Dhindsa S, Zhang N, McPhaul MJ, et al. Association of Circulating sex Hormones with Inflammation and Disease Severity in patients with COVID-  19. JAMA Netw Open . 2021;4:e2111398. doi:10.1001/ jamanetworkopen.2021.11398
- 10. Durcan  E,  Turan  S,  Bircan  BE,  et  al.  TransCOVID:  does  genderaffirming hormone therapy play a role in contracting COVID-  19? J Sex Marital Ther . 2022;48:415-426. doi:10.1080/00926 23X.2021.2000535
- 11. Klein SL, Flanagan KL. Sex differences in immune responses. Nat Rev Immunol . 2016;16:626-638. doi:10.1038/nri.2016.90
- 12. Li  C-  L,  Li  C-  Y,  Lin  Y-  Y,  et  al.  Androgen  receptor  enhances hepatic telomerase  reverse  transcriptase  gene  transcription  after  hepatitis  B  virus  integration  or  point  mutation  in  promoter  region. Hepatology . 2019;69:498-512. doi:10.1002/hep.30201

|

- 13. Chen P-  J,  Yeh S-  H,  Liu  W-  H,  et  al.  Androgen  pathway  stimulates MicroRNA-  216a  transcription  to  suppress  the  tumor  suppressor in  lung  cancer-  1  gene  in  early  hepatocarcinogenesis. Hepatology . 2012;56:632-643. doi:10.1002/hep.25695
- 14. Yeap BB, Marriott RJ, Manning L, et al. Higher premorbid serum testosterone predicts COVID-  19-  related mortality risk in men. Eur J Endocrinol . 2022;187:159-170. doi:10.1530/EJE-  22-  0104
- 15. Montopoli  M,  Zumerle  S,  Vettor  R,  et  al.  Androgen-  deprivation therapies for prostate cancer and risk of infection by SARS-  CoV-  2: a  population-  based  study  (N = 4532). Ann  Oncol .  2020;31:10401045. doi:10.1016/j.annonc.2020.04.479
- 16. Lazzeri  M,  Duga  S,  Azzolini  E,  et  al.  Impact  of  chronic  exposure to  5-  alpha  reductase  inhibitors  on  the  risk  of  hospitalization  for COVID-  19:  a  case-  control  study  in  male  population  from  two COVID-  19 regional centers of Lombardy, Italy. Minerva Urol Nephrol . 2022;74:77-84. doi:10.23736/s2724-  6051.20.04081-  3
- 17. Nickols  NG,  Mi  Z,  DeMatt  E,  et  al.  Effect  of  androgen  suppression on clinical outcomes in hospitalized men with COVID-  19: the HITCH randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open . 2022;5:e227852. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.7852

18.

- Welén K, Rosendal E, Gisslén M, et al. A phase 2 trial of the effect  of  antiandrogen  therapy  on  covid-  19  outcome:  no  evidence of benefit, supported by epidemiology and in vitro data. Eur Urol . 2022;81(3):285-293. doi:10.1016/j.eururo.2021.12.013
- 19. Li C, Ye Z, Zhang AJX, et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus  2  (SARS-  CoV-  2)  infection  by  intranasal  or  Intratesticular route  induces  testicular  damage. Clinical  Infectious  Diseases:  An Official  Publication  of  the  Infectious  Diseases  Society  of  America . 2022;75:e974-e990. doi:10.1093/cid/ciac142
- 20. Cinislioglu  AE,  Cinislioglu  N,  Demirdogen SO, et al. The relationship of serum testosterone levels with the clinical course and prognosis of COVID-  19 disease in male patients: a prospective study. Andrology . 2022;10:24-33. doi:10.1111/andr.13081
- 21. Robinson DP, Hall OJ, Nilles TL, Bream JH, Klein SL. 17 β -  estradiol protects  females  against  influenza  by  recruiting  neutrophils  and increasing virus-  specific CD8 T cell responses in the lungs. J Virol . 2014;88:4711-4720. doi:10.1128/jvi.02081-  13
- 22. Ding  T,  Zhang  J,  Wang  T,  et  al.  Potential  influence  of  menstrual status and sex hormones on female severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection: a cross-  sectional multicenter study in Wuhan, China. Clin Inf Dis . 2021;72:e240-e248. doi:10.1093/cid/ ciaa1022

23.

- Montopoli M, Zorzi M, Cocetta V, et al. Clinical outcome of SARSCoV-  2  infection  in  breast  and  ovarian  cancer  patients  who  underwent  antiestrogenic  therapy. Annal  Oncol . 2021;32:676-677. doi:10.1016/j.annonc.2021.01.069
- 24. Ghandehari S, Matusov Y, Pepkowitz S, et al. Progesterone in addition to standard of care vs standard of care alone in the treatment of men hospitalized with moderate to severe COVID-  19: a randomized. Controlled  Pilot  Trial  Chest . 2021;160:74-84.  doi:10.1016/j. chest.2021.02.024
- 25. Yuan L, Zhu H, Wu K, et al. Female sex hormone, progesterone, ameliorates  the  severity  of  SARS-  CoV-  2-  caused  pneumonia  in the Syrian hamster model. Signal Transduct Target Ther .  2022;7:47. doi:10.1038/s41392-  021-  00860-  5
- 26. Chen  L,  Li  Q,  Zheng  D,  et  al.  Clinical  characteristics  of  pregnant  women  with  Covid-  19  in  Wuhan,  China. N  Engl  J  Med . 2020;382:e100. doi:10.1056/NEJMc2009226
- 27. Ellington  S,  Strid  P,  Tong  VT,  et  al.  Characteristics  of  women  of reproductive  age  with  laboratory-  confirmed  SARS-  CoV-  2  infection by pregnancy status - United States, January 22-  June 7, 2020. MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep . 2020;69:769-775.  doi:10.15585/ mmwr.mm6925a1
- 28. Tekbali  A,  Grünebaum  A,  Saraya  A,  McCullough  L,  Bornstein  E, Chervenak FA. Pregnant vs nonpregnant severe acute respiratory syndrome  coronavirus  2  and  coronavirus  disease  2019  hospital

X

I

A

O

.

- admissions:  the  first  4 weeks  in  New  York. Am J Obstet  Gynecol . 2020;223:126-127. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2020.04.012
- 29. Li  W,  Moore  MJ,  Vasilieva  N,  et  al.  Angiotensin-  converting  enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the SARS coronavirus. Nature . 2003;426:450-454. doi:10.1038/nature02145
- 30. Shulla  A,  Heald-  Sargent  T,  Subramanya  G,  Zhao  J,  Perlman  S, Gallagher  T.  A  transmembrane  serine  protease  is  linked  to  the severe  acute  respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus  receptor  and activates  virus  entry. J Virol . 2011;85:873-882.  doi:10.1128/ JVI.02062-  10
- 31. Walls  AC,  Park  Y-  J,  Tortorici  MA,  Wall  A,  McGuire  AT,  Veesler D. Structure, function, and antigenicity of the SARS-  CoV-  2 spike  glycoprotein. Cell . 2020;181:281-292.e286.  doi:10.1016/j. cell.2020.02.058
- 32. Hamming I, Timens W, Bulthuis MLC, Lely AT, Navis GJ, van Goor H. Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis. J Pathol . 2004;203:631-637. doi:10.1002/path.1570
- 33. Iwata-  Yoshikawa N, Okamura T, Shimizu Y, Hasegawa H, Takeda M, Nagata N. TMPRSS2 contributes to virus spread and immunopathology in the Airways of Murine Models after coronavirus infection. J Virol . 2019;93:e01815-e01818. doi:10.1128/JVI.01815-  18
- 34. Mahoney M, Damalanka VC, Tartell MA, et al. A novel class of TMPRSS2  inhibitors  potently  block  SARS-  CoV-  2  and  MERSCoV  viral  entry  and  protect  human  epithelial  lung  cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2021;118:e2108728118. doi:10.1073/ pnas.2108728118
- 35. Koch J, Uckeley ZM, Doldan P, Stanifer M, Boulant S, Lozach PY. TMPRSS2 expression dictates the entry route used by SARS-  CoV-  2 to  infect  host  cells. EMBO  J . 2021;40:e107821.  doi:10.15252/ embj.2021107821
- 36. Chupp G, Spichler-  Moffarah A, Søgaard OS, et al. A phase 2 randomized,  double-  blind,  placebo-  controlled  trial  of  oral  camostat mesylate  for  early  treatment  of  COVID-  19  outpatients  showed shorter illness  course  and  attenuation  of  loss  of  smell  and  taste. medRxiv . 2022. doi:10.1101/2022.01.28.22270035
- 37. Zhuravel SV, Khmelnitskiy OK, Burlaka OO, et al. Nafamostat in hospitalized  patients  with  moderate  to  severe  COVID-  19  pneumonia:  a randomised  phase  II  clinical trial. EClinicalMedicine . 2021;41:101169. doi:10.1016/j.eclinm.2021.101169
- 38. Rossi  ÁD,  de  Araújo  JLF,  de  Almeida  TB,  et  al.  Association  between ACE2  and TMPRSS2  nasopharyngeal expression and COVID-  19 respiratory distress. Sci Rep . 2021;11:9658. doi:10.1038/ s41598-  021-  88944-  8
- 39. Song H, Seddighzadeh B, Cooperberg MR, Huang FW. Expression of ACE2,  the  SARS-  CoV-  2 receptor, and  TMPRSS2  in  prostate epithelial cells. Eur  Urol . 2020;78:296-298.  doi:10.1016/j. eururo.2020.04.065
- 40. Kalidhindi  RSR,  Borkar  NA,  Ambhore  NS,  Pabelick  CM,  Prakash YS,  Sathish  V.  Sex  steroids  skew  ACE2  expression  in  human  airway: a contributing factor to sex differences in COVID-  19? Am j physiol Lung Cell Molecul Physiol . 2020;319:L843-L847. doi:10.1152/ ajplung.00391.2020
- 41. Qiao  Y,  Wang  X-  M,  Mannan  R,  et  al.  Targeting  transcriptional regulation  of  SARS-  CoV-  2  entry  factors  ACE2  and  TMPRSS2. Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA . 2021;118:e2021450118.  doi:10.1073/ pnas.2021450118
- 42. Baughn LB, Sharma N, Elhaik E, Sekulic A, Bryce AH, Fonseca R. Targeting  TMPRSS2  in  SARS-  CoV-  2  infection. Mayo  Clin  Proc . 2020;95:1989-1999. doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.06.018
- 43. Zhao Y, Zhao Z, Wang Y, Zhou Y, Ma Y, Zuo W. Single-  cell RNA expression profiling of ACE2, the receptor of SARS-  CoV-  2. Am  J Respir Crit Care Med . 2020;202:756-759. doi:10.1164/ rccm.202001-  0179LE
- 44. Song  J,  Li  Y,  Huang  X,  et  al.  Systematic  analysis  of  ACE2  and TMPRSS2 expression in salivary glands reveals underlying

X

I

A

O

.

transmission  mechanism  caused  by  SARS-  CoV-  2. J Med  Virol . 2020;92:2556-2566. doi:10.1002/jmv.26045

- 45. Baratchian  M,  McManus  JM,  Berk  MP,  et  al.  Androgen  regulation of pulmonary AR, TMPRSS2 and ACE2 with implications for sex-  discordant COVID-  19 outcomes. Sci Rep . 2021;11:11130. doi:10.1038/s41598-  021-  90491-  1
- 46. Berletch JB, Yang F, Xu J, Carrel L, Disteche CM. Genes that escape from X inactivation. Hum Genet .  2011;130:237-245.  doi:10.1007/ s00439-  011-  1011-  z
- 47. Tukiainen T, Villani A-  C, Yen A, et al. Landscape of X chromosome inactivation across  human  tissues. Nature . 2017;550:244-248. doi:10.1038/nature24265
- 48. Milsted A, Underwood AC, Dunmire J, et al. Regulation of multiple renin-  angiotensin system genes by Sry. J Hypertens . 2010;28:59-64. doi:10.1097/HJH.0b013e328332b88d
- 49. Chen  J,  Jiang  Q,  Xia  X,  et  al.  Individual  variation  of  the  SARSCoV-  2  receptor ACE2 gene expression and regulation. Aging Cell . 2020;19:e13168. doi:10.1111/acel.13168
- 50. Keidar S, Gamliel-  Lazarovich A, Kaplan M, et al. Mineralocorticoid receptor blocker increases angiotensin-  converting enzyme 2 activity in congestive heart failure patients. Circ Res . 2005;97:946-953. doi:10.1161/01.RES.0000187500.24964.7A
- 51. Aguilar-  Pineda  JA,  Albaghdadi  M,  Jiang  W,  et  al.  Structural and  functional  analysis  of  female  sex  hormones  against  SARSCoV-  2  cell  entry. Int  J  Mol  Sci . 2021;22:11508.  doi:10.3390/ ijms222111508
- 52. Stelzig  KE,  Canepa-  Escaro  F,  Schiliro  M,  Berdnikovs  S,  Prakash YS,  Chiarella  SE.  Estrogen  regulates  the  expression  of  SARSCoV-  2 receptor ACE2 in differentiated airway epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol . 2020;318:L1280-L1281. doi:10.1152/ ajplung.00153.2020
- 53. Setlur SR, Mertz KD, Hoshida Y, et al. Estrogen-  dependent signaling in a molecularly distinct subclass of aggressive prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst . 2008;100:815-825. doi:10.1093/jnci/djn150
- 54. Lemes  RMR,  Costa  AJ,  Bartolomeo  CS,  et  al.  17 β -  estradiol  reduces SARS-  CoV-  2  infection  in  vitro. Physiol Rep .  2021;9:e14707. doi:10.14814/phy2.14707
- 55. Chadchan  SB,  Popli  P,  Maurya  VK,  Kommagani  R.  The  SARSCoV-  2 receptor,  angiotensin-  converting  enzyme  2,  is  required for  human  endometrial  stromal  cell  decidualization†. Biol  Reprod . 2021;104:336-343. doi:10.1093/biolre/ioaa211
- 56. Targeting androgen regulation of TMPRSS2 and ACE2 as a therapeutic strategy to combat COVID-  19.
- 57. Lucas JM, Heinlein C, Kim T, et al. The androgen-  regulated protease TMPRSS2 activates a proteolytic cascade involving components of the tumor microenvironment and promotes prostate cancer metastasis. Cancer  Discov . 2014;4:1310-1325.  doi:10.1158/2159-  8290. CD-  13-  1010
- 58. Leach DA, Mohr A, Giotis ES, et al. The antiandrogen enzalutamide downregulates TMPRSS2 and reduces cellular entry of SARS-  CoV-  2 in  human  lung  cells. Nat  Commun . 2021;12:4068.  doi:10.1038/ s41467-  021-  24342-  y
- 59. Cao  X.  COVID-  19:  immunopathology  and  its  implications  for therapy. Nat Rev Immunol . 2020;20:269-270. doi:10.1038/ s41577-  020-  0308-  3
- 60. Xia H-  J, Zhang G-  H, Wang R-  R, Zheng Y-  T. The influence of age and sex on the cell counts of peripheral blood leukocyte subpopulations in  Chinese  rhesus  macaques. Cell  Mol  Immunol .  2009;6:433-440. doi:10.1038/cmi.2009.55
- 61. Han J, Mei Z, Lu C, et al. Ultra-  high dose rate FLASH irradiation induced radio-  resistance of Normal fibroblast cells can Be enhanced by  hypoxia  and  mitochondrial  dysfunction  resulting  from  loss  of cytochrome  C. Front  Cell  Dev  Biol .  2021;9:672929.  doi:10.3389/ fcell.2021.672929
- 62. Lu C, Han J, Sun X, Yang G. Electrochemical detection and pointof-  care testing  for  circulating  tumor  cells:  current  techniques

and  future  potentials. Sensors  (Basel) . 2020;20:20.  doi:10.3390/ s20216073

- 63. Hewagama  A,  Patel  D,  Yarlagadda  S,  Strickland  FM,  Richardson BC.  Stronger  inflammatory/cytotoxic  T-  cell  response  in  women identified by microarray analysis. Genes Immun . 2009;10:509-516. doi:10.1038/gene.2009.12
- 64. Butterworth M, McClellan B, Allansmith M. Influence of sex in immunoglobulin levels. Nature . 1967;214:1224-1225. doi:10.1038/2141224a0
- 65. Meng  Y,  Wu  P,  Lu  W,  et  al.  Sex-  specific  clinical  characteristics and  prognosis  of  coronavirus  disease-  19  infection  in  Wuhan, China: a retrospective study of 168 severe patients. PLoS Pathog . 2020;16:e1008520. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1008520
- 66. Grimaldi CM, Cleary J, Dagtas AS, Moussai D, Diamond B. Estrogen alters thresholds for B cell apoptosis and activation. J  Clin Invest . 2002;109:1625-1633. doi:10.1172/JCI14873
- 67. Cai Z, Fan S, Sun X, Mo X, Yang G. Novel microfluidic device for measurable residual disease detection in acute leukemia. Innovation (Camb) . 2023;4:100408. doi:10.1016/j.xinn.2023.100408
- 68. Fuseini H, Yung JA, Cephus JY, et al. Testosterone decreases house dust  mite-  induced  type  2  and  IL-  17A-  mediated  airway  inflammation. Journal of Immunology (Baltimore, Md: 1950) .  2018;201:18431854. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1800293
- 69. Seillet  C,  Laffont  S,  Trémollières  F,  et  al.  The  TLR-  mediated  response  of  plasmacytoid  dendritic  cells  is  positively  regulated  by estradiol in vivo through cell-  intrinsic estrogen receptor α signaling. Blood . 2012;119:454-464. doi:10.1182/blood-  2011-  08-  371831
- 70. Griesbeck  M,  Ziegler  S,  Laffont  S,  et  al. Sex  differences  in Plasmacytoid dendritic cell levels of IRF5 drive higher IFN-   proα duction in women. J Immunol .  2015;195:5327-5336. doi:10.4049/ jimmunol.1501684
- 71. Yang G, Lu C, Mei Z, et al. Association of Cancer Stem Cell RadioResistance  under  Ultra-  High  Dose  Rate  FLASH  irradiation  with lysosome-  mediated autophagy. Front Cell Dev Biol . 2021;9:672693. doi:10.3389/fcell.2021.672693
- 72. Wang JP, Zhang L, Madera RF, Woda M, Libraty DH. Plasmacytoid dendritic cell interferonα production to R-  848 stimulation  is decreased  in  male  infants. BMC  Immunol . 2012;13:35. doi:10.1186/1471-  2172-  13-  35
- 73. Wells  AI,  Coyne  CB.  Type  III  interferons  in  antiviral  defenses  at barrier surfaces. Trends Immunol . 2018;39:848-858. doi:10.1016/j. it.2018.08.008
- 74. Maenosono  R,  Nian  Y,  Iske  J,  et  al.  Recipient  sex  and  estradiol levels affect transplant outcomes in an age-  specific fashion. Am J Transplant . 2021;21:3239-3255. doi:10.1111/ajt.16611
- 75. Atyeo  C,  DeRiso  EA,  Davis  C,  et  al.  COVID-  19  mRNA  vaccines drive  differential  antibody  fc-  functional  profiles  in  pregnant,  lactating, and nonpregnant women. Sci Transl Med . 2021;13:eabi8631. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.abi8631
- 76. Anticoli S, Dorrucci M, Iessi E, et al. Association between sex hormones and anti-  S/RBD antibody responses to COVID-  19 vaccines in healthcare workers. Hum Vaccin Immunother . 2023;19:2273697. doi:10.1080/21645515.2023.2273697
- 77. Pagano  MT,  Peruzzu  D,  Busani  L,  et  al.  Predicting  respiratory failure  in  patients  infected  by  SARS-  CoV-  2  by  admission  sexspecific biomarkers. Biol Sex Differ . 2021;12:63. doi:10.1186/ s13293-  021-  00407-  x
- 78. Cadegiani FA, McCoy J, Gustavo Wambier C, Goren A. Early antiandrogen therapy with Dutasteride reduces viral shedding, inflammatory responses, and time-  to-  remission in males with COVID-  19: a randomized,  double-  blind,  placebo-  controlled  interventional  trial (EAT-  DUTA AndroCoV trial - biochemical). Cureus . 2021;13:e13047. doi:10.7759/cureus.13047
- 79. Cadegiani FA, McCoy J, Gustavo Wambier C, et al. Proxalutamide significantly accelerates viral clearance and reduces time to clinical remission in patients with mild to moderate COVID-  19: results

|

<!-- image -->

from a randomized, double-  blinded. Placebo-  Controlled Trial Cureus . 2021;13:e13492. doi:10.7759/cureus.13492

- 80. Nicastri E, Marinangeli F, Pivetta E, et al. A phase 2 randomized, double-  blinded, placebo-  controlled, multicenter trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of raloxifene for patients with mild to moderate  COVID-  19. EClinicalMedicine .  2022;48:101450.  doi:10.1016/j. eclinm.2022.101450
- 81. Infante M, Pieri M, Lupisella S, et al. Low testosterone levels and high  estradiol  to  testosterone  ratio  are  associated  with  hyperinflammatory state and mortality in hospitalized men with COVID-  19. Eur  Rev  Med  Pharmacol  Sci . 2021;25:5889-5903.  doi:10.26355/ eurrev\_202110\_26865
- 82. Su S, Hua D, Li J-  P, et al. Modulation of innate immune response to viruses including SARS-  CoV-  2 by progesterone. Signal Transduct Target Ther . 2022;7:137. doi:10.1038/s41392-  022-  00981-  5
- 83. Grasselli G, Tonetti T, Protti A, et al. Pathophysiology of COVID19-  associated  acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome:  a  multicentre prospective observational study. Lancet Respir Med .  2020;8:12011208. doi:10.1016/S2213-  2600(20)30370-  2
- 84. Ackermann M, Verleden SE, Kuehnel M, et al. Pulmonary vascular Endothelialitis, thrombosis, and angiogenesis in Covid-  19. N Engl J Med . 2020;383:120-128. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2015432
- 85. Card  JW,  Carey  MA,  Bradbury  JA,  et  al.  Gender  differences  in murine  airway  responsiveness  and  lipopolysaccharide-  induced inflammation. J Immunol . 2006;177:621-630. doi:10.4049/ jimmunol.177.1.621
- 86. Diaz GA, Parsons GT, Gering SK, Meier AR, Hutchinson IV, Robicsek A.  Myocarditis  and  pericarditis  after  vaccination  for  COVID-  19. JAMA . 2021;326:1210-1212. doi:10.1001/jama.2021.13443
- 87. Hale  SL,  Birnbaum  Y,  Kloner  RA.  Beta-  estradiol,  but  not  alphaestradiol,  reduced  myocardial  necrosis  in  rabbits  after  ischemia and  reperfusion. Am  Heart  J . 1996;132:258-262.  doi:10.1016/ s0002-  8703(96)90419-  6
- 88. Manavathi B, Kumar R. Steering estrogen signals from the plasma membrane  to  the  nucleus:  two  sides  of  the  coin. J  Cell  Physiol . 2006;207:594-604. doi:10.1002/jcp.20551
- 89. Petrilli CM, Jones SA, Yang J, et al. Factors associated with hospital admission  and  critical  illness  among  5279  people  with  coronavirus disease 2019 in new York City: prospective cohort study. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed) . 2020;369:m1966. doi:10.1136/bmj.m1966

X

I

A

O

.

- 90. Battisti S, Pedone C, Napoli N, et al. Computed tomography highlights  increased  visceral  adiposity  associated  with  critical  illness in COVID-  19. Diabetes  Care . 2020;43:e129-e130.  doi:10.2337/ dc20-  1333
- 91. Kassir  R.  Risk  of  COVID-  19  for  patients  with  obesity. Obes  Rev . 2020;21:e13034. doi:10.1111/obr.13034
- 92. Giagulli VA, Castellana M, Pelusi C, Triggiani V. Androgens, body composition, and their metabolism based on sex. Front Horm Res . 2019;53:18-32. doi:10.1159/000494900
- 93. Heine PA, Taylor JA, Iwamoto GA, Lubahn DB, Cooke PS. Increased adipose tissue in male and female estrogen receptor-  alpha knockout mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2000;97:12729-12734. doi:10.1073/ pnas.97.23.12729
- 94. Lovejoy  JC,  Bray  GA,  Bourgeois  MO,  et  al.  Exogenous  androgens  influence  body  composition  and  regional  body  fat  distribution  in  obese  postmenopausal  women-a clinical  research  center study. J  Clin  Endocrinol  Metab .  1996;81:2198-2203.  doi:10.1210/ jcem.81.6.8964851
- 95. West-  Eberhard MJ. Nutrition, the visceral immune system, and the evolutionary origins of pathogenic obesity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2019;116:723-731. doi:10.1073/pnas.1809046116
- 96. Wu Y, Guo C, Tang L, et al. Prolonged presence of SARS-  CoV-  2 viral RNA in faecal samples. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol .  2020;5:434435. doi:10.1016/S2468-  1253(20)30083-  2
- 97. Sungnak  W,  Huang  N,  Bécavin  C,  et  al.  SARS-  CoV-  2  entry  factors  are  highly  expressed  in  nasal  epithelial  cells  together  with innate  immune  genes. Nat  Med . 2020;26:681-687.  doi:10.1038/ s41591-  020-  0868-  6

How to cite this article: Xiao H, Wei J, Yuan L, et al. Sex hormones in COVID-  19 severity: The quest for evidence and influence mechanisms. J Cell Mol Med . 2024;28:e18490. doi:10.1111/jcmm.18490