## Discover More With Flow Cytometry TM Quantify Cytokines With LEGENDplex'

- Pre-defined and custom panels with extensive bioassay validation
- Panels optimized for various immune cell types and research areas
- Setup manuals for flow cytometers
- Complimentary software suite for data analysis

Learn more

## Ihe Journalof Immunology

RESEARCH ARTICLE | MARCH 01 2000

## Neutrophil Activation by Bacterial Lipoprotein Versus Lipopolysaccharide: Dierential Requirements for Serum and CD14 1 

Ana Maria Soler-Rodriguez; ... et. al

J Immunol (2000) 164 (5): 2674-2683.

https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.164.5.2674

## Related Content

Diphosphoryl Lipid A from Rhodobacter sphaeroides Blocks the Binding and Internalization of Lipopolysaccharide in RAW 264.7 Cells

J Immunol (July,2001)

CD14-dependent and CD14-independent signaling pathways in murine macrophages from normal and CD14 knockout mice stimulated with lipopolysaccharide or taxol.

- J Immunol (May,1997)

Lipopolysaccharide stimulates the tyrosine phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases p44, p42, and p41 in vascular endothelial cells in a soluble CD14-dependent manner. Role of protein tyrosine phosphorylation in lipopolysaccharide-induced stimulation of endothelial cells.

J Immunol (October,1995)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Neutrophil Activation by Bacterial Lipoprotein Versus Lipopolysaccharide: Differential Requirements for Serum and CD14 1

Ana Maria Soler-Rodriguez,* Hongwei Zhang, † Henri S. Lichenstein, Nilofer Qureshi, ‡ § David W. Niesel,* Sheila E. Crowe, Johnny W. Peterson,* and Gary R. Klimpel * 2

Neutrophil activation plays an important role in the inflammatory response to Gram-negative bacterial infections. LPS has been shown to be a major mediator of neutrophil activation which is accompanied by an early down-regulation of L-selectin and up-regulation of CD1lb/CD18. In this study, we investigated whether lipoprotein (LP), the most abundant protein in the outer membrane of bacteria from the family Enterobacteriaceae , can activate neutrophils and whether this activation is mediated by mechanisms that differ from those used by LPS or Escherichia coli diphosphoryl lipid A (EcDPLA). Neutrophil activation was assessed by measuring down-regulation of L-selectin and up-regulation of CD11b/CD18. When comparing molar concentrations of LP vs EcDPLA, LP was more potent (four times) at activating neutrophils. In contrast to LPS/EcDPLA, LP activation of neutrophils was serum independent. However, LP activation of neutrophils was enhanced by the addition of soluble CD14 and/or LPS-binding protein. In the presence of serum, LP activation of neutrophils was inhibited by different mAbs to CD14. This inhibition was significantly reduced or absent when performed in the absence of serum. Diphosphoryl lipid A from Rhodobacter spheroides (RaDPLA) completely inhibited LPS/EcDPLA activation of neutrophils but only slightly inhibited LP activation of neutrophils. These results suggest that LP activation of human neutrophils can be mediated by a mechanism that is different from LPS activation and that LP is a potentially important component in the development of diseases caused by Gram-negative bacteria of the family EnterobacteriaceaeThe Journal of Immunology, . 2000, 164: 2674-2683.

eutrophils have been shown to be important in host de- L-selectin is a transmembrane, constitutive monomeric protein fense to both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacte- n neutrophils. It is cleaved and shed quickly after LPS stimulation rial infections. Neutrophil activation plays an important dose-dependent manner (11-13). CD11b/CD18 (also called role in the inflammatory response and involves a number of dis- AC-1 or CR3) is a transmembrane, constitutive dimeric glycotinct functions that result not only in cytokine production but also n on neutrophils. It is a member of the tegrin family of in neutrophil migration into infected tissues. For Gram-negativeins formed by the noncovalent association of oneone bacteria, LPS (endotoxin) has been shown to be a major mediatorsubunit. It is quickly up-regulated by LPS in a dose-dependent of neutrophil activation (1-3). LPS-induced neutrophil activation r through the mobilization of intracellular granules contain o in a M protei b 2 in prote a and b manne in

regulation of CD11b/CD18 on the cell surface (4-8). L-selectinnly recently have major advances been made in identifying and CD11b/CD18 are important molecules because they mediate the membrane components and intracellular signaling pathways the adhesion of neutrophils to the vascular endothelium. This ad- onsible for LPS-induced cell activation (14). CD14 and LPShesive response is thought to underlie the movement of neutrophils ding protein (LBP) are two proteins important in LPS activadence suggesting that integrin-mediated signaling in leukocytesin that is present in plasma (19). LBP binds LPS and appears plays a role in the induction of proinflammatory cytokine produc- function by facilitating and accelerating the binding of LPS to O resp bin 3 tio of different cell populations, including neutrophils, macr phag and endothelial cells (14-18). LBP is an acute prote to membrane CD14 (20). However, LBP can also transfer LPS to high-density lipoprotein, which can result in significant inhibiti of cellular responses to LPS (21, 22). Membrane-bound CD14 is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein that has no trans membrane and intracellular domains (23). Activation of neutrophils and macrophages by concentrations of LPS considered physiological ( 100 ng/ml) is dependent on the presence of LBP and , can be blocked by Ab to CD14 (15). Under serum-free conditions, LPS ( , 100 ng/ml) fails to activate neutrophils or macrophages because of the absence of LBP (20). *Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uni-† versity of California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095; ‡ Curagen Corporation, Branford, CT 06405; and illiam S. Middleton Veterans § W Memorial Medical Center and Bacteriology Department, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53705 Received for publication July 23, 1999. Accepted for publication December 15, 1999.

N is accompanied by an early down-regulation of L-selectin and up- g CD11b/CD18 (12). from the blood into tissues that accompany the early stages of an n inflammatory response (9). Furthermore, there is increasing evi-es, tion (10).

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

There is now strong evidence that LPS-bound CD14 interacts RsDPLA was purified as described previously (43). LPS, LP, EcDPLA, with an as yet unidentified protein(s) that induces a signal trans- DPLA were dispersed by sonication for 3 min on ice before use. to CD14 and the subsequent activation are independent processes . The anti-CD14 hybridomas were 3C10, 60bca, and 26ic. The Abs (24-26). Recently, defective signaling in LPS nonresponsive mice cific for human CD14 and isotype control Abs were purified from in receptor tro culture supernatants using protein G chromatography. Dr. H. Lichenand Rs Three different hybridomas that produce Abs specific for human CD14 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA) spe vi stein (Amgen, CA) provided purified human LBP and human soluble CD14 (sCD14).

other receptors besides TLR4 can be involved in LPS signaling of utrophil purification and culture were performed following the procerole in the activation of neutrophils by Gram-negative bacteria, by centrifugation of the whole blood in tubes containing neutrophillittle is currently known about the function of other bacterial-de- g media (Cardinal Associates, Santa Fe, NM) or mono-poly resolvouter 15°C. Purified PMNL were washed twice with ice-cold HEPES buffer have been shown to activate different immuneresuspended in HEPES buffer supplemented with calcium (1.5 mM CaCl cules are either covalently attached to murein or free in the outer iability of these cells was, as determined by trypan blue exmembrane (33). LP or synthetic lipopeptide analogues of LP have lusion. Neutrophils, as isolated above, were kept on ice until used as Ne dure described by others (8, 12, 44) with slight modifications. Briefly, venous blood was collected from normal human volunteers in Vacutainer (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA) collection tubes containing 15% 3 EDTA solution. The polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNL) were iso -lated isolatin ing medium (ICN Pharmaceuticals, Aurora, OH) for 35 min, at 400, 3 g at (30 mM HEPES, 110 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, and 10 nM glucose) and 2 ), magne 2 ), and FCS (5% heat inactivated). Cell purifica -tion using the procedure described above resulted in PMNL preparations that were 98% PMNL, of which 99% were neutrophils and 1% mononuclear leukocytes, as shown by Wright's staining of cytospin preparations. Cell v . 97% c described below.

duction event across the plasma membrane, and that LPS binding was shown to be due to a mutation in the Toll-like (TLR)-4 gene ( Tlr4 ) (27) and TLR4-deficient mice were shown to be hyporesponsive to LPS (28). Toll-like receptor-2 has also been proposed to play a role in LPS activation of different cell popula- MO.) All plastic materials were sterile and all glass materials were tions (29, 30). However, recently, Heine et al. (31) have shown thatlized and baked overnight at 263°C to destroy endotoxin. expression of TLR2 is sufficient but not essential for mammalian responses to LPS. In this regard, Vogel et al. (32) have shown that murine macrophages. Thus, the exact role of these proteins in LPS activation is still unclear. All other chemicals used in this study were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, steri Neutrophil purification and activation

Although LPS has been clearly documented to play an important K rived components in neutrophil activation. A number of membrane proteins contained in Gram-negative bacteria from Enterobacteriaceae functions. Lipoprotein (LP) is one of these proteins and is the most sium (1 mM MgCl abundant protein in the outer membrane of these bacteria (33). In Escherichia coli and closely related bacteria, about 10 ole 5 LP m been shown to activate mouse B cells and mouse and human macrophages (34-38). We have shown that LP is important in the f L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 was determined following the procedure induction and pathogenesis of septic shock. LP was shown to in- scribed by others (8, 12, 44), with modifications. Briefly, neutrophils duce in vitro production of TNF- nd IL-6 by mouse and human a a macrophages (39, 40) and to induce lethal shock and in vivo pro- d FCS were incubated with various amounts of LP, LPS, EcDPLA, or duction of TNF- and IL-6 in LPS-responsive and -nonresponsive a mice (41). More important, LP was shown to act synergistically flow cytometry as described below. with LPS to induce lethal shock and proinflammatory cytokine production (41). Recently, we have shown that LP is released by tivate neutrophils in the presence and absence of serum. In the serumgrowing or lysed bacteria and that this released LP may play an e condition, the FCS was replaced by 300ml human serum albumin important role in the pathogenesis associated with Gram-negative bacterial infections (42). However, the potential role of LP in bacterial activation of human neutrophils has not been fully explored, and the possibility that LP can activate neutrophils via receptors human neutrophils (110 6 /ml) were incubated in HEPES buffer that are different from those used by LPS activation has not beenaining investigated. In this report, we show that LP can activate neutro- r sCD14 (1 phils, resulting in the up-regulation of CD11b/CD18 and the down- itive control for these experiments consisted of purified neutrophils in regulation of L-selectin. Neutrophil activation by LP was only partially inhibited by Rhodobacter spheroides diphosphoryl lipid A (RsDPLA), which completely inhibited LPS activation, and LP CD18 were determined by flow cytometry. activation of neutrophils can take place in the absence of serum. In the presence of serum, LP activation is mediated via CD14 but is These results have potentially important implications for furthermay play an important role in these processes. The effect of LP vs LPS or EcDPLA on neutrophil surface expression o de (1 3 10 6 /ml) in HEPES buffer supplemented with calcium, magnesium, an fMLP (10 mM) in polystyrene, sterile, round-bottom tubes in a water bath at 37°C for 30 min. Surface L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 were determined by In some experiments, LP and LPS were assessed for their ability to ac fre m g/ (HSA) (Albumarc; Baxter, McGraw Park, IL). Effect of purified LBP and/or sCD14 on neutrophil activation by LP vs EcDPLA or LPS Purified 3 cont calcium, magnesium, HSA (300g/ml), m LBP (10 ng/ml), and/o m g/ml) and various doses of LP, EcDPLA, or LPS. The pos cubated in HEPES buffer supplemented with calcium, magnesium, 5% FCS, and various doses of LP, EcDPLA, or LPS. The cells were incubated for 30 min in a water bath at 37°C and then surface L-selectin and CD11b/ Treatment of neutrophils with mAbs to CD14 Downloaded from http://journals.aai.org/jimmunol/article-pdf/164/5/2674/1316876/2674.pdf by guest on 11 September 2023

E. coli K12 LPS (LPS) was extracted from aqueous suspensions of overnight cultures with 45% phenol at 70°C as we have described previously 11b/CD18 up-regulation. (39). Bacterial LP was purified from E. coli, Yersinia enterocolitica WA (0:8), Salmonella typhimurium (TML), and Shigella flexneri (SA 100) as described previously (39). LP purified from these different bacteria contained , 25 pg of LPS/mg of protein and was shown to be pure by SDSPAGE and by HPLC. Diphosphoryl lipid A from E. coli K12 (EcDPLA) (molecular mass, 1900 Da) was purchased from List Laboratories (Camp- cium, magnesium, and 5% FCS were incubated with and without RsDPLA bell, CA), and prepared according to the manufacturer's specifications.ng/ml) fo1 h at37°C. Then various doses of LP, LPS, or EcDPLA Effect of RsDPLA on neutrophil activation induced by LP vs EcDPLA or LPS Purified human neutrophils (1 10 /ml) in HEPES buffer containing cal 3 6 -(100 r

of

CD14 independent when activation occurs in the absence of serum. rified human neutrophils (110 6 /ml) in HEPES buffer containing cal ing our understanding of the role of bacterial components in neu- experiments, the effect of mAb to human CD14 on LP-induced modtrophil activation and bacterial pathogenesis and suggest that LPn of neutrophil surface markers was determined both in the presence Materials and Methods Reagents Pu 3 -cium and magnesium were pretreated fo 1 h at 4°C with 10 r m g/ml of either mAb to human CD14 (3C10, 60bca, or 26ic) or an isotype control Ab. In some ulatio and absence of FCS. In these experiments, HSA (300 /ml) was present m g in cultures containing no serum. Following pretreatment with Abs, various amounts of LP or LPS were added to each tube and the cells were incubated for 30 min in a water bath at 37°C. The cells were then assessed for surface L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 by flow cytometry as described below. The results of all of the above experiments are expressed as percent inhibition of L-selectin down-regulation and as percent inhibition CD

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 1. LP down-regulates L-selectin ( and up-regulates CD11b/ A ) CD18 ( B ) on human neutrophils. Purified human neutrophils were treated ame molar concentrations of LP (or EcDPLA ( with various amounts of LP ( ) or LPS ( f M ), and the MFI values corresponding to L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 were determined. The results are ults are expressed as percentage of maximal L-selectin expression ( expressed as percentage of maximal L-selectin expression ( percentA ) and age of maximal CD11b/CD18 expression () vs concentration of LP or B LPS in ng/ml. This is a representative example of 10 independent exper-dent experiments. L-selectin maximal MFI 48 iments. L-selectin maximal MFI 123 5 6 11. CD11b/CD18 maximal MFI 5 1033 6 22. FIGURE 2. Comparison of the effect of equimolar doses of LP vs EcDPLA on the down-regulation of L-selectin (nd the up-regulation of A ) a CDl1b/CD18 ( B ). Purified human neutrophils were incubated with the s f ) M ), and the MFI values corresponding to L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 were determined. The res A ) and as percentage of maximal CD11b/CD18 expression (vs molar concenB ) tration of LP and EcDPLA. This is a representative example of four indepen 5 6 3. CD11b/CD18 maximal MFI 5 602 6 112.

<!-- image -->

were added to the cultures and the cells were incubated for 30 min at 37°C. ated with different mAbs specific for different epitopes of CD14 and tre

Surface L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 were determined by flow cytometry. stimulated with either LP or LPS.

Flow cytometry analysis of surface L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 Surface L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 were determined by direct double with an isotype control Ab and stimulated with either LP or LPS; staining using FITC-conjugated anti-human L-selectin (PharMingen, San 1b/CD18 MFI corresponding to control cells not stimulated with either The percent inhibition of CD11b/CD18 up-regulation was calculated as follows: percent inhibition of up-regulation( 5 [1 2 A 2 X )/( A 2 B )] 3 100, where A 5 CD11b/CD18 maximal MFI corresponding to cells treated B 5 CD1 LP or LPS, and X 5 CD11b/CD18 MFI corresponding to cells treated with different mAbs to different epitopes of CD14 and stimulated with either LP

L-selectin maximal MFI is the value corresponding to cells not stimulated rophil expression of L-selectin and/or CD11b/CD18. For these (MFI) is the value corresponding to cells treated with 100 ng/ml of LPS. lity to activate neutrophils. Data presented in Figs. 1-3 sho selectin down-regulation or as percent inhibition of CD11b/CD18 up-reg- comparable to that of LPS. LP was also compared on a molar ulation. The percent inhibition of L-selectin down-regulation was calcu- to EcDPLA. As shown in Fig. 2, LP was at least four times corresponding to cells treated with an isotype control Ab and stimulated nd 20 min after exposure (Fig. 3). Neutrophil activation was In initial experiments, we investigated whether LP could regulate neut E. coli LP vs LPS vs EcDPLA for their abi that LP can down-regulate L-selectin and up-regulate CD11b/ CD18 expression on neutrophils. LP-induced neutrophil activation was basis more potent than EcDPLA at inducing neutrophil activation. Optimal neutrophil activation by LP, LPS, or EcDPLA took place at arou E. coli LP, since LP purified from other members of

Diego, CA) and PE-conjugated anti-human CD11b/CD18 (Becton Dickinson). Neutrophils (1 10 /ml), resuspended in cold PBS (0.1 M phos 3 6 -phate buffer, 0.85% NaCl, 1% FCS (pH 7.4)), were incubated with both or LPS. fluorochrome-conjugated Abs for 30 min at 4°C. The cells were washed once with cold PBS, fixed with 2% -formaldehyde, and analyzed using a p Becton Dickinson FACScan instrument at the Flow Cytometry Core Facility of the Department of Microbiology and Immunology (University of Texas Medical Branch). The results are reported as percentage of maximal L-selectin expression and percentage of maximal CD11b/CD18 expression. with either LP or LPS. CD11b/CD18 maximal mean fluorescence intensity experiments, we compared Some experiments (see Figs. 7 and 8) assessed LP- and LPS-induced neutrophil activation on neutrophils pretreated with mAbs to CD14. These experiments (Figs. 7 and 8) show the results as percent inhibition of Llated as follows: percent inhibition of down-regulation 5 [1 2 ( A 2 X / ) ( A 2 B )] 3 100, where A 5 maximal MFI for L-selectin corresponding to control cells not stimulated with either LP or LPS; -selectin MFI B 5 L with either LP or LPS; and X 5 L-selectin MFI corresponding to cellsnot unique to Results LP activation of neutrophils

FIGURE 3. Kinetics of down-regulation of L-selectin ( up-regA ) and ulation of CD11b/CD18 (). Purified human neutrophils were incubated B with 100 ng/ml of LP ( ) or LPS ( M f ), with fMLP (10 nM) ( ), or with GLYPH&lt;140&gt; buffer only ( ) for various periods of time. The MFI values of L-selectin F and CD11b/CD18 were determined by flow cytometry. The results are expressed as percentage of maximal MFI vs concentration of LP or LPS in ng/ml. This is a representative example of two independent experiments. L-selectin maximal MFI 5 140 6 7. CD11b/CD18 maximal MFI 5 1156 6 121.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 4. LP from different Gram-negative bacteria down-regulates L-selectin and up-regulates CD11b/CD18. Purified human neutrophils were treated with 100 ng/ml of either LP purified from different Gramnegative bacteria or E. coli LPS (100 ng/ml), and the MFI values corresponding to L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 were determined. The results are expressed as percentage of maximal L-selectinession ( ) and perexpr A centage of maximal CD11b/CD18 expression ( ) vs LP from different B bacteria or LPS. This is a representative example of three independent experiments. L-selectin maximal MFI33 5 6 5. CD11b/CD18 maximal 5 600 6 103.

<!-- image -->

the Enterobacteriaceae Y. enterocolitica typhimurium ( , S. , and S. flexneri ) had similar activity (Fig. 4).

## Serum requirement for LP activation of neutrophils

To investigate whether LP activation of neutrophils was dependent MFI on serum, as has been reported for LPS, we performed a series of experiments comparing the ability of LP vs LPS vs EcDPLA to activate neutrophils in the presence or absence of serum. Neutro- itions. Data from a representative experiment are presented in phils were exposed to varying concentrations of LP vs LPS vs ig. 6. Under serum-free conditions, both LBP and sCD14 enEcDPLA in the presence or absence of FCS and assessed for hanced neutrophil activation by LP. An even more dramatic enchanges in L-selectin and CD11b/CD18. As previously reported byancement was observed when both LBP and sCD14 were present others (14), LPS or EcDPLA failed to activate neutrophils undering serum-free conditions (Fig. 5,d C an D ). In contrast, LP activationletely inactive when no serum or LBP or sCD14 was present, but of neutrophils was not affected by the absence of serum (Fig. 5, BP, sCD14, and a combination of both (LBP/sCD14) resulted in A and B ). This result was observed using a wide range of LP significant neutrophil activation (Fig. 6,). Identical results concentrations. Role of LBP and CD14 in LP-induced neutrophil activation LBP and sCD14 have been shown to play an important role in LPS activation of different cell populations, including neutrophils (14- ion of neutrophils could be mediated by different mecha18, 45). Since LP could activate neutrophils in the absence of ms depending upon whether activation occurred in the presence serum, we investigated whether LP-induced activation of neutro- serum or in tissues where serum would be limited. cond F h dur the assays. As previously reported, EcDPLA was comp L C and D were obtained in experiments using LPS (data not presented). These results show that LP activation can be enhanced by LBP and/or sCD14, even though LP can activate neutrophils in the absence of serum, LBP, or sCD14. These results suggest that LP activat nis of

phils was affected by LBP and/or sCD14. To investigate this pos- LPS activation of neutrophils has been shown to be dependent sibility, we compared LP vs EcDPLA for their ability to activate LPS interaction with membrane CD14 (14-18, 45). To invesneutrophils in the presence of LBP and/or sCD14 under serum-free igate whether LP activation of neutrophils was also dependent on on t

FIGURE 5. LP-induced down-regulation of L-selectin and up-regulation of CD11b/CD18 is serum independent. Purified human neutrophils were trea with various doses of LP or LPS in medium with or without FCS (5%). nd A a B , The MFI values corresponding to LP-induced down-regulation of L-selectin ( ) and up-regulation of CD11b/CD18 ( with ( ) and without () FCS. A B ) f M C and D , The MFI values corresponding to LPS-induced down-regulation of L-selectin ( and up-regulation of CD11b/CD18 ( ) with ( ) and without () FCS. The results are presented as percentage of maximal L-selectin C ) D f M expression and percentage of maximal CD11b/CD18 expression vs LP and LPS concentration in ng/ml.

<!-- image -->

membrane CD14, we performed a series of experiments comparing of neutrophils is CD14 dependent when performed in the presence the ability of LP vs LPS to activate neutrophils that had beenerum, and that LP and LPS may interact with CD14 differently CD14evidenced by the differential inhibition mediated by 3C10 vs of s as 60

cellst investigated whether the different anti-CD14 mAbs described (45-47), whereas 26ic has been shown to bind to CD14 but doesabove could alter neutrophil activation by LP under serum-free not inhibit LPS-induced cell activation (14). We assessed neutro- itions. As seen in Fig. 8, significantly less inhibition was ob phils using LP vs LPS at 32 and at 128 ng/ml and in the presence served when these Abs were assessed using serum-free conditions. of serum with or without 10g/ml of each of the different mAbs This was most dramatic when LP was assessed at 128 ng/ml. At or the corresponding isotype control Ab. Data from a representa- s concentration, and in the absence of serum, 3C10 had almost tive experiment are presented in Fig. 7. In the presence of serum, nhibitory activity against LP activation of neutrophil expres both 60bca and 3C10 almost completely inhibited neutrophil ac- on of CD11b/CD18 or L-selectin. These results suggest that LP Since LP could activate neutrophils in the absence of serum, we nex cond thi no i si a of neutrophils is CD14 independent when activation ta

## RsDPLA does not inhibit LP activation of neutrophils

when compared with LPS activation at 128 ng/ml. Interestingly, number of studies have shown that RsDPLA can inhibit LPS 3C10 had significantly less inhibitory activity for LP when com- tivation of different cell populations (43, 45, 48, 49). We nex pared with LPS. In fact, when LP was assessed at 128 ng/ml, 3C10 investigated whether RsDPLA could also inhibit LP activation of 2% inhibition), whereas LPS acti-medium plus RsDPLA (100 ng/ml) for 1 h and then assessed vation (using 128 ng/ml) was still significantly inhibited by 3C10 their ability to be activated by varying concentrations of LP inhibition). Only very low levels of inhibitory activity were ob- A activation of neutrophils. Identical results were obtained served when 26ci was assessed for LPS or LP activation of neu-hen using LPS (data not presented). In contrast, RsDPLA had A ac neutrophils. Neutrophils were pretreated with either medium or for vs EcDPLA. As seen in Fig. 9, RsDPLA completely inhibited EcDPL w signific less of an effect on LP activation of neutrophils

pretreated with different mAbs specific for different epitopes. For these experiments, we used the following mAbs:bca. 3C10, 60bca, and 26ic. 3C10 and 60bca have both been shown to markedly inhibit LPS-mediated effects on CD14-positive m tivation by LPS at both 32 and 128 ng/ml. For LP activation of ctivation neutrophils, 60bca was also inhibitory when LP was assessed at 32 kes place in the absence of serum. ng/ml. However, when LP was assessed at 128 ng/ml, 60bca was dramatically less efficient at inhibiting LP activation of neutrophils had only marginal inhibitory activity (L-selectin% inhi5 5 6 1 bition; CD11b/CD18 5 11 6 (L-selectin 86 5 6 10% inhibition; CD11b/CD18 5 88 6 13% trophils. Collectively, the above results suggest that LP activation antly

FIGURE 6. Purified LBP and/or sCD14 enhance LP-induced down-regulation of L-selectin and up-regulation of CD11b/CD18. Purified human neutrophils were incubated with the same molar doses of LP or EcDPLA in the following conditions: 5% FCS ( FCS ( ), LBP ( f ), no p GLYPH&lt;140&gt; ) sCD14 ( , F ) and , LBP and sCD14 ( M ). The results are presented as percentage of maximal L-selectin expression and percentage of maximal CD11b/CD18 expression. A and B, Results using LP. For LP, the results in the presence and absence of serum were identical, and only the data obtained in the absence of se shown. C and D , Results obtained using EcDPLA. This is a representative example of three independent experiments. L-selectin maximal MFI 5 48 6 6. CD11b/CD18 maximal MFI 5 432 6 95.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 7. LP- and LPS-induced modulation of cell surface markers are inhibited differently by anti-CD14 mAbs. Purified human neutrophils we incubated with 10g/ml of anti-CD14 mAbs 3C10, 60bca, and 26ic or the corresponding isotype controls fo fore LP () or LPS ( m r 1 h be f M ) was added to the cultures at 32 and 128 ng/ml. The results are presented as average percent inhibition of L-selectin down-regulationnd average 6 SD ( A and B ) a percent inhibition of CD11b/CD18 up-regulation ( 6 SD C and D ; n 5 3). , Those LP values that are statistically different from the corresponding valu p for LPS (Student'stest, t p , 0.01).

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 8. The anti-CD14 mAb-mediated inhibition of LP-induced modulation of neutrophil surface markers is significantly reduced in the absenc serum. Purified human neutrophils were incubated with 10 ml of anti-CD14 mAbs 3C10, 60bca, and 26ic or the corresponding isotype controls for 1 h, m g/ both in the presence ( and absence of FCS ( ). LP was then added to the cultures at the final concentration of 32 or 128 ng/ml. The MFI values f ) M corresponding to L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 were determined using flow cytometry. The results are expressed as average percent inhibition of L-se tin down-regulation 6 SD ( A and B ) and average percent inhibition of CD11b/CD18 up-regulation ( 6 SD C and D ; n 5 3). , The value for LP determined p in the presence of serum is statistically different from the corresponding value determined in the absence of serum (Student's t test, p , 0.01).

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 9. RsDPLA partially inhibits LP-induced modulation of surface L-selectin and CD11b/CD18. Purified human neutrophils were incubated wit ( M ) or without ( ) RsDPLA (100 ng/ml) for 1 h. After this preincubation, LP ( f A and B ) or EcDPLA ( C and D ) was added to the cultures at equimolar doses and surface L-selectin and CD11b/CD18 were determined by flow cytometry. The results are expressed as percentage of maximal L-select expression (and A C ) and percentage of maximal CD11b/CD18 expression (nd B a D ). This is a representative example of three independent experiments. L-selectin maximal MFI 5 75 6 8. CD11b/CD18 maximal MFI 5 789 6 95.

<!-- image -->

These results, again, suggest that LP and EcDPLA/LPS use dif- n the presence of LBP and/or sCD14 (51, 52). This appears to be ferent mechanism(s) and/or receptors for neutrophil activation. lear Discussion In this report, we present evidence that LP may play an importanttal role in the inflammation associated with infections caused by bac- ivation was enhanced by serum or sCD14 (53). It should also be teria of the Enterobacteriaceae family. The following observationsnoted that Sellati et al. (52) found suggestive evidence that ther were made in this study: 1) LP obtained from different members of ould the Enterobacteriaceae family can activate human neutrophils. 2)oproteins vs their synthetic analogues (lipopeptides). It is possi LP activation can take place in the absence of serum. 3) In thet LP from presence of serum, Abs to CD14 can inhibit LP-induced activation, proteins produced by spirochetes. However, the biological acbut this inhibition, depending on the Ab, disappears as the con- ties of both LP and lipoproteins produced by spirochetes are centration of LP is increased. 4) In the absence of serum, Abs to endent on the presence of the fatty acids at the N terminus of CD14 have little to no inhibitory activity for LP-induced neutro- e proteins. This has been demonstrated by a number of labophil activation. 5) LBP and sCD14 can enhance LP-induced neu- ratories using lipopeptides and LP that had its lipid moiety retrophil activation. 6) RsDPLA fails to significantly inhibit LP-in- or altered (51, 57, 65, 66, 69, 70). Thus, the lipid portion of duced neutrophil activation but can completely inhibit LPS- is also probably necessary for LP activation of neutrophils. induced neutrophil activation. i a c difference between LP and spirochetal lipoproteins but could also reflect different requirements for different cell popul tions since we were assessing neutrophils and spirochetal lipoproteins were assessed on human monocyte cell lines. In fact, spiroche lipoproteins were shown to activate HUVECs, and this act c be differences in the biological activity of spirochetal p tha Enterobacteriaceae could act differently from lipo tivi dep thes moved LP

centrations of LP. The capacity of LP to activate neutrophils under vation cyte and neutrophil activation by lipoproteins from Treponema pallidum and Borrelia burgdorferi serum independent be capable of activating different cell populations Whether LP produced by bacteria from the Enterobacteriaceae family and lipoproteins produced by spirochetes activate cell pop- activation of different cell populations has been shown to ulations via similar or different receptors and/or signaling path- ked by the naturally occurring antagonist RsDPLA. When ways is unclear. In this regard, we found that LP activation ofent at low concentrations, RsDPLA acts in a manner consistent neutrophils could be significantly enhanced by the presence ofh competitive inhibition of LPS activation, whereas at higher LBP and/or sCD14. In contrast, activation of human monocytes byoncentrations, it inhibits certain LPS responses noncompetitivel spirochetal lipoproteins was shown not to be enhanced or changed d synergizes with LPS for other responses (44, 45, 48, 49, 76LPS be bloc pres wit c an

Neutrophil activation by LP could be achieved using 2-10 ng/ een shown to activate different cell populations via a CD14-deml, which was comparable to the concentrations of LPS necessary endent pathway (71-74). Monocyte activation by spirochetal lifor neutrophil activation. However, in most experiments, optimal otein was also shown to be inhibited by mAbs specific for neutrophil activation could be achieved using concentrations of LP(51, 52). However, LPS and spirochetal lipoprotein differed that were lower than concentrations required by LPS for neutrophilhat signaling by lipoprotein proceeded via distinct transducin activation. This was confirmed by experiments that compared on alements downstream of CD14 (52). We also found that LP actimolar basis the ability of LP vs EcDPLA to activate neutrophils. Iton of neutrophils could be significantly inhibited by 3C10 and should be pointed out that in some experiments neutrophils ob-ca mAbs. Interestingly, this inhibition was much less dramatic tained from some individuals responded better to LPS than LP or 3C10 when compared with 60bca. In fact, 3C10 had little in(data not presented). Although only suggestive, these results indi- ry activity when LP was assessed at 128 ng/ml even though cate that LP and LPS may mediate neutrophil activation via dif- S at this concentration was still almost completely inhibited by ferent mechanisms that could be associated with differential ex-Ab. These results suggest that LP may interact with CD14 pression of surface receptors by different individuals. The fact that ntly from LPS. The fact that LP could activate neutrophils in nanogram levels of LP could activate neutrophils is significant in absence of serum suggested that a CD14-independent mechalight of our previous work. Using a dot blot assay, we showed that sm could also be involved in LP activation. In fact, mAbs to growing bacteria released significant levels of both LP and LPS 14 (3C10 and 60bca) had significantly less or no inhibitory (42). During mid-logarithmic growth, -1.5 ; 1 m g of LP/ml was detected in culture supernatants from different bacteria of the ggest that LP can activate neutrophils via both CD14-dependent Enterobacteriaceae . Thus, the possibility exists that LP released in -independent mechanisms. This is not unique to LP since a vivo by growing or lysed bacteria could contribute or induce an4-independent stimulatory pathway also becomes apparent at inflammatory response. A striking difference between LPS and LP for activating neu-poproteins (51). However, our results suggest that LP can actitrophils was the fact that LP could accomplish this in the complete via a CD14-independent pathway at significantly lower conabsence of serum. This was observed using a wide range of con-entrations when compared with LPS. Whether LP mediates cell serum-free conditions could be important for inducing an in vivo roteins or LPS is currently under investigation. Additionally inflammatory response in tissues where serum is limited. Mono- hether LP mediates cellular signaling via TLR2 and/or TLR4 is or by lipopeptides correspond-sive mice (C3H/HeJ) (41), TLR4 does not appear to be necessary ing to the N termini of these proteins have also been shown to be r LP activation of cells. This is clearly a difference between LP (50-52). In fact, during the last couple ofLPS activation and suggests that different membrane transyears, a significant amount of information has accumulated about cers may be used by these bacterial products. In fact, we have the role of spirochetal lipoproteins in the inflammation associatedthat LP and LPS act synergistically in inducing cytokine with syphilis and Lyme disease and how these lipoproteins activate duction by mouse macrophages and for inducing lethal shock in different cell populations differently from LPS (50-60). Addition-41). However, humans and mice may use different signaling ally, LP from Gram-negative bacteria and synthetic lipopeptide /or receptor pathways with regard to LP and LPS signaling. For analogues of LP have been shown by a number of laboratories to example, we have not been able to show any synergistic interaction (61-68). en LP and LPS for human neutrophil activation (data not A number of different bacterial products, other than LPS, have b p popr CD14 in t e vati 60b f hibito LP this differe the ni CD activity when assessed under serum-free conditions. These results su and CD1 progressively higher concentrations of LPS (75) and spirochetal li vate c acti via signaling pathways different from spirochetal li pop w unclear. Since LP can activate macrophages from LPS-nonresponfo and du shown pro mice ( and betwe presented). Downloaded from http://journals.aai.org/jimmunol/article-pdf/164/5/2674/1316876/2674.pdf by guest on 11 September 2023

78). RsDPLA had very different effects on LP vs LPS activation of . Tobias, P. S., J. C. Mathison, and R. J. Ulevitch. 1988. A family of lipopolysacneutrophils. Although LPS was completely inhibited by RsDPLA, LP activation of neutrophils was only slightly inhibited when op- aziot, A., S. Chen, E. Ferrero, M. G. Low, R. Silbert, and S. N. Goyert. 1988. timal concentrations of LP were studied. These results further e monocyte differentiation antigen CD14 is anchored to the cell membrane by strengthen our conclusion that LP activates neutrophils differently from LPS. 22 charide binding proteins involved in responses to Gram-negative sepsis. J. Biol. Chem. 263:13479. 23. H Th a phosphatidylinositol linkage. J. Immunol. 141:547.

- 24. Kitchens, R. L., and R. S. Munford. 1995. Enzymatically deacylated LPS can antagonize LPS at multiple sites in the LPS recognition pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 270:9904.
- 25. Kitchens, R. L., R. J. Ulevitch, and R. S. Munford. 1992. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) partial structures inhibit responses to LPS in a human macrophage cell line wi J. Exp. Med. 176:485.
- important component in the development of diseases caused by 6. Perera, P. Y., S. N. Vogel, G. R. Detore, A. Haziot, and S. M. Goyert. 1997. 2 CD14-dependent and CDl4-independent signaling pathways in murine macrophages from normal and CD14 knockout mice stimulated with LPS or Taxol. J. Immunol. 158:4422.

In summary, our results strongly suggest that LP-induced activation of human neutrophils is mediated by a mechanism(s) that is different from LPS-induced activation and that LP is a potentially thout inhibiting LPS uptake be CD14 mediated pathway. Gram-negative bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae .

## References

- 1. Guthrie, L. A., L. C. McPhail, P. M. Henson, and R. B. Johnston. 1984. Priming saccharide. J. Exp. Med. 160:1656.
- 27. Poltorak, A., X. He, I. Smirnova, M.-Y. Liu, C. V. Huffel, X. Du, D. Birdwell, E. Alejos, M. Silva, C. Galanos, et al. 1998. Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in Tlr4 gene. Science 282:2085.
- of neutrophils for enhanced release of oxygen metabolites by bacterial lipopoly- shino, K., O. Takeuchi, T. Kawai, H. Sanjo, T. Ogawa, Y. Takeda, K. Takeda, 28. Ho and S. Akira. 1999. Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4)-deficient mice are hyporesponsive to LPS: evidence for TLR4 as the LPS gene product. J. Immunol. 162:3749.
- lipopolysaccharides prime human neutrophils for enhanced production of leuko- Kirschning, C. J., H. Wesche, T. M. Ayres, and M. Rothe. 1998. Human Toll-like 29. receptor 2 confers responsiveness to bacterial lipopolysaccharide. J. Exp. Med. 188:2091.
- 2. Doerfler, M. E., R. L. Danner, J. H. Shelhamer, and J. E. Parrillo. 1989. Bacterial triene B4. J. Clin. Invest. 83:970.
- 3. Aida, Y., and M. J. Pabst. 1991. Neutrophil responses to lipopolysaccharide. Effect of adherence on triggering and priming of the respiratory burst. J. Immunol. 146:1271.
- 4. Nogare, A. R. D., and W. C. Yarbrough. 1990. A comparison of intact and deacylated lipopolysaccharide on human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. J. Immunol. 144:1404.
- 30. Yang, R.-B., M. R. Mark, A. Gray, A. Huang, M. H. Xie, M. Zhang, A. Goodard, W. I. Wood, A. L. Gurney, and P. J. Godowski. 1998. Toll-like receptor-2 mediates lipopolysaccharide-induced cellular signaling. Nature 395:284.
- 31. Heine, H., C. J. Kirschning, E. Lien, B. G. Monks, M. Rothe, D. T. Golenbock. 1999. Cutting edge: cells that carry a null allele for Toll-like J. Immunol. 162:6971.
- Bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein has endotoxin-neutralizing activity. , S. N., D. Johnson, P. Y. Perera, A. Medvedev, L. Lariviere, S. T. Qureshi, Wright, S. D., and S. C. Silverstein. 1982. Tumor-promoting phorbol esters stim- 3H/HeJ defect in mice that lack a dominant negative mutation. 32. Vogel and D. Malo. 1999. Cutting edge: functional characterization of the effect of the C J. Immunol. 162:5666.
- 5. Marra, M. N., C. G. Wilde, J. E. Griffith, J. L. Snable, and R. W. Scott. 1990. receptor 2 are capable of responding to endotoxin. J. Immunol. 144:662.
- 6. ulate C3b and C3b receptor-mediated phagocytosis in cultured human mono9 cytes. J. Exp. Med. 156:1149.
- 7. Mac-I and MEL-14 adhesion proteins inversely regulated by chemotactic factors. Science 245:1238.
- Kishimoto, T. K., M. A. Jutila, E. L. Berg, and E. C. Butcher. 1989. Neutrophil teins of Gram-negative bacteria: biosynthesis, assembly, and functions. 33. DiRienzo, J. M., K. Nakamura, and M. Inouye. 1978. The outer membrane proAnnu. Rev. Biochem. 47:481.
- 34. Melchers, F., V. Braun, and C. Galanos. 1975. The lipoprotein of the outer memE. coli : a B lymphocyte mitogen. J. Exp. Med. 142:473.
- 35. Biesert, L., W. Scheuer, and W. G. Bessler. 1987. Interaction of mitogenic bacterial lipoprotein and a synthetic analogue with mouse lymphocytes: isolation and c Eur. J. Biochem. 162:651.
- 8. Crockett-Torabi, E., B. Sulenbarger, C. Wayne Smith, and J. C. Fantone. 1995. brane of Activation of human neutrophils through L-selectin and Mac-I molecules. J. Immunol. 154: 2291.
- and regulation of adhesion molecules in neutrophil recruitment to inflammatory Besslet, W., and B. Ottenbreitt. 1977. Studies of lipoprotein from the outer mem36. brane of E. coli. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 5:239 . 7 .
- 9. Kishimoto, T. K., and R. Rothlein. 1994. Integrins, ICAMs, and selectins: role haracterization of binding proteins. sites. Adv. Pharmacol. 25:117.
- and 7. 3 Hauschildt, S., P. Hoffinann, H. U. Beuscher, G. Duffiues, P. K. H. Weismuller, C. Jung, and W. G. Besster, 1990. Activation of bone marrowde mouse macrophages by bacterial lipopeptide: cytokine production, Eur. J. Immunol. 20:63.
- C. Feeban, R. Betageri, K. Darlak, A. F. Spatola, and T. K. Kishimoto. 1996. cells by bacterial lipoprotein and synthetic lipoprotein analogues. 38. Hoffman, P., S. Heinle, U. F. Schade, H. Loppnow, A. J. Ulmer, H. D. Flad, G. Jung, and W. G. Bessler. 1988. Stimulation of human and mouse adherent Immunobiology 177:158.
- 10. Mukaida, N., Y. Ishikawa, N. Ikeda, N. Fujioka, S. Watanabe, K. Matsushima. 1996. Novel insight into the molecular mechanism of endotoxin shock: biochemical analysis of LPS receptor signaling in a cell free system tar- rived geting NF- B and regulation of cytokine production/action through B2 integrin phagocytosis and la expression. k in vitro. J. Leukocyte Biol. 59:145.
- 11. Walcheck, B., J. Kahn, J. M. Fisher, B. B. Wang, R. S. Fisk, D. G. Payan, Neutrophil rolling altered by inhibition of L-selectin shedding in vitro. Nature 380:720.
- 12. Boffegaard, N., L. Kjeldsen, H. Sengelov, M. S. Diamond, T. A. H. Clarke Anderson, T. K. Kishimoto, and D. F. Bainton. 1994. Changes in subcellular localization and surface expression of L-selectin, alkaline phosphatase, and Mac-I in human neutrophils during stimulation with inflammatory me- 0. diators. J. Leukocyte Biol. 56:80.
- Springer, 39. Zhang, H., L. Kaur, D. W. Niesel, G. S. Seethaaramaiah, J. W. B. S. Prabhakar, and G. R. Klimpel. 1997. Lipoprotein from Yersinia enterocolitica contains epitopes that cross-react with the human thyrotropin receptor. J. Immunol. 158:1976.
- 4 Zhang, H., L. Kaur, D. W. Niesel, G. S. Seetharamaiah, J. W. L. B. Justement, B. S. Prabhakar, and G. R. Klimpel. 1996. Yersinia enterocolitica envelope proteins that are cross-reactive with the thyrotropin (T J. Autoimmun. 9:509 .
- 41. Zhang, H., J. W. Peterson, D. W. Niesel, and G. R. Klimpel. 1997. Bacterial lipoprotein and LPS not synergistically to induce lethal shock and proinflammaJ. Immunol. 159:4868.
- 13. Bennett, T. A., E. B. Lynam, L. A. Sklar, and J. S. Rogel. 1996. Hydroxamatebased metalloprotease inhibitor blocks shedding of L-selectin adhesion molecules SHR) also have B-cell mitogenic activity. from leukocytes: functional consequences for neutrophil aggregation. J. Immunol. 156:3093.
- 14. Ulevitch, R. J., and P. S. Tobias. 1995. Receptor-dependent mechanism of cell tory cytokine production. stimulation by bacterial endotoxin. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 13:437.
- 15. 1990. CD14, a receptor for complexes of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and LPS binding protein. Science 249:1431.

- Wright, S. D., R. A. Ramos, P. S. Tobias, R. J. Ulevitch, and J. C. Mathison.release by bacteria: potential factor in bacterial pathogenesis. 42. Zhang, H., D. W. Niesel, J. W. Peterson, and G. R. Klimpel. 1998. Lipoprotein Infect. Immun. 66: 5196.
- Haziot, A., B.-Z. Tsuberi, and S. M. Goyert. 1993. Neutrophil CD14: biochemical polymorphonuclear leukocytes induced by chemotactic factors and by purifica43. Fearon, D. T., and L. A. Collins. 1983. Increased expression of C3b receptors on tion procedures. J. Immunol. 130:370.
- andactor Sp1 binding by spectrally pure diphosphoryl lipid A from 44. Jarvis, B. W., and N. Qureshi. 1997. Inhibition of LPS-induced transcription f Rhodobacter sphaeroides , protein kinase inhibitor H-8, and dexamethasone. Infect. Immun. 65:1640.
- 16. properties and role in the secretion of tumor necrosis factor ponse to a in res lipopolysaccharide. J. Immunol. 150:5556.
- 17. Antalszalmas, P., J. A. G. Vanstrijp, A. J. L. Weersink, J. Verhoef, K. P. M. Van Kessel. 1997. Quantitation of surface CD14 on human monocytes and neutrophils. J. Leukocyte Biol. 61:721.
- 18. Bordessoule, D., M. Jones, K. C. Gatter, and D. Y. Mason. 1993. Immunological 5. patterns of myeloid antigens: CD13, CD14, CD16, CD31, CD65, and CD67. Br. J. Haematol. 83:370.
- 19. Su, G. L., R. L. Simmons, and S. C. Wang. 1995. Lipopolysaccharide binding protein participation in cellular activation by LPS. Crit. Rev. Immunol. 15:201.
- 4 Lynn, W. A., C. R. H. Raetz, N. Qureshi, and D. T. Golenbock. 1991. LPSinduced stimulation of CD11b/CD18 expression on neutrophils: evidence of specific receptor-based response and inhibition by lipid A-based antagonists. J. Immunol. 147:3072.
- Hailman, Z., H. S. Lichenstein, M. M. Wurfel, D. S. Miller, D. A. Johnson, 1995. Identification of a domain in soluble CD14 essential for LPS signaling but 46. Juan, T. S. C., E. Hailman, M. J. Kelley, S. D. Wright, and H. S. Lichenstein. not LPS binding. J. Biol. Chem. 270:17237.
- 47. Wright, S. D., R. A. Ramos, P. S. Tobias, R. J. Ulevitch, and J. C. Mathison. 1990. CD14, a receptor for complexes of LPS and LPS binding protein. Science 249: 1431.
- 20. M. Kelley, L A. Busse, M. M. Zukowsli, and S. D. Wright. 1994. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-binding protein accelerates the binding of LPS to CD14. J. Exp. Med. 179:269.
- 21. Hailman, E., J. J. Albers, G. Wolfbauers, A.-Y. Tu, and S. D. Wright. 1996. tein. J. Biol. Chem. 271:12172.
- Neutralization and transfer of lipopolysaccharide by phospholipid transfer pro- nn, W. A., and D. T. Golenbock. 1992. Lipopolysaccharide antagonists. 48. Ly Immunol. Today 13:271.

- 49. Manthey, C. L., P. Y. Perera, N. Qureshi, P. L. Stutz, T. A. Hamilton, and Bessler, W. G., and B. P. Ottenbrit. 1977. Studies on the mitogenic principle of S. N. Vogel. 1993. Modulation of LPS-induced macrophage gene expression by Rhodobacter sphaeroides lipid A and SDZ 880.431. Infect. Immun. 61: 3518. 64. lipoprotein from the outer membrane of E. coli Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. . 76:239 .
- 50. Morrison, T. B., J. H. Weis, and J. J. Weis. 1997. Borrelia burgdorferi outer protein A (OspA) activates and primes human neutrophils. J. Immunol. 158:4838.
- 51. Gaimbartolomel, G. H., V. A. Dennis, B. L. Lasater, and M. T. Philipp. 1999. lipoprotein from the outer membrane of Induction of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines by Borrelia burgdorferi lipoproteins in monocytes is mediated by CD14. Infect. Immun. 67:140.
- 65. Bessler, W. G., K. Resch, E. Hancock, and K. Hantke. 1997. Induction of lymphocyte-proliferation and membrane changes by lipoprotein derivatives of the E. coliZ. Immunitaetsforsch. 153:11 . .
- 66. Bessler, W. G., M. Cox, A. Lex, B. Suhs, K. H. Wiesmuller, and C. Jung. 1985. Synthetic lipopeptide analogs of bacterial lipoprotein are potent polyclonal act vators for murine B lymphocytes. J. Immunol. 135:1900.
- 67. Hauschildt, S., P. Hoffman, H. U. Beuscher, G. Dufhues, P. Henrick, K. H. Wiesmuller, C. Jung, and W. G. Bessler. 1990. Activation of bone marrowderived mouse macrophages by bacterial lipopeptide: cytokine production, phagocytosis and Ia expression. Eur. J. Immunol. 20:63.
- 52. Sellati, T. J., D. A. Douis, R. L. Kitchens, R. P. Darveau, J. Pugin, R. J. Ulevitch, S. C. Gangloff, S. M. Goyert, M. V. Norgard, and J. D. Radolf. 1998. Treponema pallidum and Borrelia burgdorferi lipoproteins and synthetic lipopeptides activate monocytic cells via a CD-14 dependent pathway distinct from that used by lipopolysaccharide. J. Immunol 160:5455 .
- 53. Wooten, R. M., T. B. Morrison, J. H. Weis, S. D. Wright, R. Thieringer, and J. J. Weis. 1998. The role of CD14 in signaling mediated by outer membrane 68. lipoproteins of Borrelia burgdorferi . Immunol. 160:5485. . J
- 54. Radolf, J. D., M. V. Norgard, M. E. Brandt, R. D. Isaacs, P. A. Thompson, and B. Beutler. 1991. Lipoproteins of Borrelia burgdorferi and Treponema pallidum construct. J. Immunol. 147:1968.
- Hoffman, P., S. Heinle, U. F. Schade, H. Loppnow, A. J. Ulmer, H. D. Flad, G. Jung, and W. G. Bessler. 1988. Stimulation of human and mouse adherent cells by bacterial lipoprotein and synthetic lipopeptide analogues. Immunobiology 177:158.
- activate cachectin/tumor necrosis factor synthesis: analysis using a CAT reporter dolf, J. D., L. L. Arndt, D. R. Akins, L. L. Curetty, M. E. Levi, Y. Shen, 69. Ra L. S. Davis, and M. V. Norgard. 1995. Treponema pallidum and Borrelia burgdorferi lipoproteins and synthetic lipopeptides activate monocytes/macrophages. J. Immunol. 154:2866.
- 70. Akins, D. R., B. K. Purcell, M. Mitra, M. V. Norgard, and J. D. Radolf. 1993. Lipid modification of the 17-kilodalton membrane immunogen of Treponema pallidum determines macrophage activation as well as amphiphilicity. Infect. Immun. 61:1202.
- 55. Ma, Y., and J. J. Weis. 1993. Borrelia burgdorferi outer surface lipoproteins OspA and OspB possess B-cell, mitogenic, and cytokine-stimulatory properties. Infect. Immun. 61:3843 .
- 56. Norgard, M. V., L. L. Arndt, D. R. Akins, L. L. Curetty, D. A. Harrich, and J. D. Radolf. 1996. Activation of human monocytic cells by Treponema pallidum and Borrelia burgdorferi lipoproteins and synthetic lipopeptides proceeds via a pathway distinct from that of lipopolysaccharide but involves the transcriptional activator NF- B. k Infect. Immun. 64:3845.
- 57. Weis, J. J., Y. Ma, and L. F. Erdile. 1994. Biological activities of native and recombinant Borrelia burgdorferi outer surface protein A: dependence on lipid modification. Infect. Immun. 62:4632.
- 71. Cleveland, M. G., J. D. Gorham, T. L. Murphy, E. Tuomanen, and K. M. Murphy. 1996. Lipoteichoic acid preparations of Gram-positive bacteria induce interleukin-12 through a CD14-dependent pathway. Infect. Immun. 64:1906.
- 72. Gupta, D., T. N. Kirkland, S. Viriyakosol, and R. Dziarski. 1996. CD14 is a c J. Biol. Chem. 271:23310.
- 73. Kusunoki, T., E. Hailman, T. S. C. Juan, H. S. Lichenstein, and S. D. Wright. 19 Staphylococcus aureus that bind CD14 and stimulate innate immune responses. J. Exp. Med. 182:1673.
- 58. Seiler, K. P., and J. J. Weis. 1996. Immunity to Lyme disease: protection, pa- ell-activating receptor for bacterial peptidoglycan. thology and persistence. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 8:503.
- 59. Sellati, T. J., L. D. Abrescia, J. D. Radolf, and M. B. Furie. 1996. Outer surface 95. Molecules form lipoproteins of Borrelia burgdorferi activate vascular endothelium in vitro. Infect. Immun. 64:3180.
- 74. Wright, S. D. 1995. CD14 and innate recognition of bacteria. J. Immunol. 155:6.
- 75. Ulevilch, R. J., and P. S. Tobias. 1995. Receptor-dependent mechanism of cell stimulation by bacterial endotoxin. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 13:437.
- 76. Kitchens, R. L., and R. S. Munford. 1995. Enzymatically deacylated LPS can antagonize LPS at multiple sites in the LPS recognition pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 270:9904.
- 60. Wooten, R. M., V. R. Modur, T. M. McIntyre, and J. J. Weis. 1996. Borrelia burgdorferi outer membrane protein A induces nuclear translocation of nuclear factor- B and inflammatory activation in human endothelial cells. k J. Immunol. 157:4584 .
- 61. Melchers, F., V. Braun, and C. Galanos. 1975. The lipoprotein of the outer membrane of E. coli : a B lymphocyte mitogen. J. Exp. Med. 142:473.
- 62. Biesert, L., W. Scheuer, and W. G. Bessler. 1987. Interaction of mitogenic bac- Kitchens, R. L., R. J. Ulevitch, and R. S. Munford. 1992. Lipopolysaccharide terial lipoprotein and a synthetic analogue with mouse lymphocytes: isolation and PS) partial structures inhibit responses to LPS in human macrophage cell line characterization of binding proteins. Eur. J. Biochem. 162:651. 77. (L without inhibiting LPS uptake by CD14 mediated pathway. J. Exp. Med. 176: 485.
- derived mouse macrophages by bacterial lipopeptide cytokine production phago- 1991. Lipid A-like molecules that antagonize the effects of endotoxins on human 7 Golenbock, D. T., R. Y. Hampton, N. Qureshi, K. Takayama, and C. R. H. Raetz. monocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 266:19490.
- 63. Hauschildt, S., P. Hoffman, H. U. Beuscher, G. Dufhus, P. Heinrich, K. H. Weismuller, G. Jung, and W. G. Bessler. 1990. Activation of bone marrow-8. cytosis and Ia expression. Eur. J. Immunol. 20:63.