<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

2021; 11(6): 2770-2787. doi: 10.7150/thno.51756

Research Paper

## Neutrophil-derived trail is a proinflammatory subtype of neutrophil-derived extracellular vesicles

Young-Jin Youn 1# , Sanjeeb Shrestha 1# , Yu-Bin Lee 1# , Jun-Kyu Kim 1 , Jee Hyun Lee 2 , Keun Hur 2 , Nanda Maya Mali 3 , Sung-Wook Nam 4 , Sun-Hwa Kim 1 , Sunwoong Lee 4 , Dong-Keun Song 5 , Hee Kyung Jin 6,7 , Jae-sung Bae 1,7 , Chang-Won Hong 1 

- 1. Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41944, Republic of Korea.
- 2. Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41944, Republic of Korea.
- 3. Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41944, Republic of Korea.
- 4. Department of Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41944, Republic of Korea.
- 5. Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chuncheon, 24252, Republic of Korea.
- 6. Department of Laboratory Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41944, Republic of Korea.
- 7. Stem Cell Neuroplasticity Research Group, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 41944, Republic of Korea.

#These authors contributed equally to this work.

-  Corresponding author: Chang-Won Hong, M.D., Ph.D. E-mail: cwhong@knu.ac.kr; Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University; 680 Gukchaeborang-ro, Daegu 41944, Republic of Korea; Tel.: 82-53-420-4812.

© The author(s). This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). See http://ivyspring.com/terms for full terms and conditions.

Received: 2020.08.10; Accepted: 2020.12.12; Published: 2021.01.01

## Abstract

Aims: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are membrane-derived vesicles that mediate intercellular communications. Neutrophils  produce  different  subtypes  of  EVs  during  inflammatory  responses.  Neutrophil-derived  trails (NDTRs)  are  generated  by  neutrophils  migrating  toward  inflammatory  foci,  whereas  neutrophil-derived microvesicles (NDMVs) are thought to be generated by neutrophils that have arrived at the inflammatory foci. However, the physical and functional characteristics of neutrophil-derived EVs are incompletely understood. In this study, we aimed to investigate the differences between NDTRs and NDMVs.

Methods: The generation of neutrophil-derived EVs were visualized by live-cell fluorescence images and the physical characteristics were further analyzed using nanotracking analysis assay, scanning electron microscopic analysis, and marker expressions. Functional characteristics of neutrophil-derived EVs were analyzed using assays for bactericidal activity, monocyte chemotaxis, phenotype polarization of macrophages, and miRNA sequencing. Finally, the effects of neutrophil-derived EVs on the acute and chronic inflammation were examined in vivo .

Results: Both EVs share similar characteristics including stimulators, surface marker expression, bactericidal activity, and chemoattractive effect on monocytes via MCP-1. However, the integrinmediated  physical  interaction  was  required  for  generation  of  NDTRs  whereas  NDMV  generation  was dependent on PI3K pathway. Interestingly, NDTRs contained proinflammatory miRNAs such as miR-1260, miR-1285, miR-4454, and miR-7975, while NDMVs contained anti-inflammatory miRNAs such as miR-126, miR-150,  and  miR-451a.  Although  both  EVs  were  easily  uptaken  by  monocytes,  NDTRs  enhanced proinflammatory macrophage polarization whereas NDMVs  induced anti-inflammatory macrophage polarization.  Moreover,  NDTRs  showed  protective  effects  against  lethality  in  a  murine  sepsis  model  and pathological changes in a murine chronic colitis model.

Conclusion: These  results  suggest  that  NDTR  is  a  proinflammatory  subtype  of  neutrophil-derived  EVs distinguished from NDMV.

Key words: EV, extracellular vesicle; NDMV, neutrophil-derived microvesicle; NDTR, neutrophil-derived trail

## Introduction

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are membranederived  vesicles  surrounded  by  lipid  bilayers  [1]. Since EVs  express  various  ligands  and  receptors

originating from  their source  cells and  transport various molecules to their target cells, they are important mediators of intercellular communications

[2]. Neutrophils,  the  professional  phagocytes,  also produce  EVs  in  response  to  various  stimulators. Neutrophil-derived EVs are thought to be generated through  the  membrane  blebbing  and  shedding,  and conform to the general description of EV [2]. Recently, a  specialized  type  of  neutrophil-derived  EVs  was discovered  and  called  trails  [3].  During  migration through inflamed tissue,  the  uropods  of  neutrophils are  elongated  by  adhesion  to  the  endothelium  [4]. These elongated uropods detach from the cell bodies, finally leaving chemokine-containing EVs [3]. Hence, neutrophil-derived  EVs  can  be  categorized  into  two subtypes according to the mechanism of generation: neutrophil-derived microvesicles (NDMVs) and neutrophil-derived trails (NDTRs).

NDMVs are the classical type of neutrophil-derived EVs. Neutrophils generate NDMVs  either  spontaneously  [5]  or  in  response  to various immunological stimuli such as bacterial stimulation [6-16], cytokines [12, 17], chemokines [13], complement components [13, 18], and antibodies [19, 20]. Flow cytometric analysis and electron microscopic analysis showed that NDMVs are small enclosed vesicles less than 1 μm in diameter [13,  15, 17,  20-23]  and  surrounded  with  a  double-layered membrane [5, 10]. Phosphatidylserine (PS) is exposed in the outer layer of the membrane [6, 8, 13, 15, 16, 18, 20,  24-26]  and  various  adhesion  molecules,  such  as integrin  αM [5,  6,  14,  15,  19,  23] ,  integrin  β [6],  and L-selectins [5, 21, 26], are expressed on the surface. In addition, NDMVs contain protease-enriched granules [5,  6,  10,  12,  15,  19,  20,  26].  Although  NDMVs  limit growth of bacteria by inducing bacterial aggregation [16],  NDMVs  exert  anti-inflammatory  functions  in general  [27].  NDMVs  suppress  inflammatory  gene expressions in natural killer (NK) cells [13], monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs) [7], macrophages  [8,  9,  24,  28],  chondrocytes  [17],  and endothelial  cells  [11,  19].  Moreover,  NDMVs  reduce cartilage damage in a murine model of inflammatory arthritis by enhancing TGFβ production from chondrocytes [17] and increase mortality in a murine model of sepsis by decreasing macrophage activation [29].

NDTRs  are  a  recently  identified  subtype  of neutrophil-derived EV. They  are generated from neutrophils during migration from blood vessels into inflamed  tissue  [3,  4].  The  physical  forces  between neutrophils and endothelial cells elongate the uropods of migrating neutrophils [4],  leading  to  the detachment  of  the  tail  portion  [3].  Since  integrins mediate  physical  binding  between  neutrophils  and endothelial cells, they are important for generation of NDTRs  [30]. The detached tail portion contains CXC-chemokine  ligand  12  (CXCL12)  which  guides

CD8 +  T cells to the influenza-infected tissues [3].

Although extensive studies revealed the anti-inflammatory roles of NDMVs,  the  detailed understanding  on  the  functions  of  NDTRs  has  not been elucidated. The most important difference between NDTRs and NDMVs is considered to be the spatiotemporal  generation  mechanism;  NDTRs  are found in tissues where neutrophils migrated, whereas NDMVs  are  found  at  the  inflammatory  foci  where neutrophils  arrived.  Based  on  this  difference,  we hypothesized that NDTRs and NDMVs play different roles  in  modulating  immune  responses.  Here,  we show that NDTRs are proinflammatory EVs distinguished from anti-inflammatory NDMVs. Although both EVs share similar characteristics including  bactericidal  activity  and  chemoattractive effects  against  monocytes,  NDTRs  showed  distinct proinflammatory miRNA profiles that induced proinflammatory macrophage polarization. Moreover,  NDTRs  protected  mice  against  sepsisinduced lethality and attenuated pathological changes in mice with chronic colitis whereas NDMVs did not.

## Results

## Characterization of NDTRs

To identify specific stimulators for NDTR formation, we examined the effects of known stimulators  for  NDMV  formation.  The  stimulators were  categorized  into  the  following  subgroups:  (i) pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs): formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP), lipopolysaccharide (LPS), opsonized E. coli , and opsonized S. aureus ;  (ii)  danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs): high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), complement component 5a (C5a), and S100 calcium binding protein B (S100B); (iii) inflammatory cytokines: tumor necrosis factorα (TNF α) -and interferonγ (IFN γ); -(iv) anti -inflammatory or immunosuppressive cytokines: tumor growth factorβ (TGFβ)  and  interleukin -4  (IL-4);  and  (v)  exogenous compounds: N(γ) -nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME) and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). To visualize EV formation, neutrophils were stained with cell tracker green and live-cell fluorescence  images  were  obtained.  All  stimulators induced the formation of NDTRs from neutrophils in the  fibronectin-coated  chemotaxis  chamber  (Figure 1A, Movie S1). The stimulated neutrophils exhibited elongated  uropods  (Figure  1A,  arrows),  which  were subsequently detached from the cell bodies, forming NDTRs  (Figure  1A,  arrowheads).  As  expected,  all stimulators  induced  the  formation  of  NDMVs  from neutrophils in the uncoated confocal dish (Figure 1A, Movie S2). Live-cell fluorescence imaging showed the

blebbing of membranes (Figure 1A, arrowheads) and membrane  blebs were finally detached, forming NDMVs (Movie S2). To quantify amounts of NDTRs and  NDMVs,  calcein-AM  loaded  neutrophils  were allowed  to  generate  EVs  and  fluorescence  levels  of calcein  in  neutrophil-derived  EVs  were  measured

using spectrofluorometer. A high correlation coefficient  between the levels of calcein fluorescence and  particle  concentrations  was  confirmed  (Figure S1A).  We  did  not  find  any  significant  differences  in amounts  of  neutrophil-derived  EVs  in  response  to indicated stimulators (Figure 1B).

Figure 1. Characterization of NDTRs. (A-B) Various stimulators induce formation of both NDTRs and NDMVs (A) Representative time-lapse images of EVs released from neutrophils. Neutrophils were stained with cell-tracker, stimulated with the indicated stimulators, and visualized using immunofluorescence microscopy for 1 h. The time denotes minutes after stimulation. The arrows indicate elongated uropods. The arrowheads indicate deposited neutrophil-derived EVs. All data are representative of more than three independent experiments with n = 3 per each group. (B) Quantification of relative amounts of generated neutrophil-derived EVs. Neutrophils were stained with calcein-AM and stimulated  with  the  indicated  stimulators.  n  =  4-7  per  group.  Relative  fluorescence  normalized  to  the  fluorescence  of  EVs  isolated  from  unstimulated  neutrophils.  (C) Representative density plots and bar graph for sizes and concentrations of neutrophil-derived EVs. The size distribution and concentration of neutrophil-derived EVs was measured using Nanosight tracking analysis (NTA). n = 3 per group. (B-C) The data shown are the mean ± SEM. (B-C) *** P &lt; 0.001 vs control. (D) * P &lt; 0.05; ** P &lt; 0.01; *** P &lt; 0.001. (D-E) Scanning electron microscopic analysis of neutrophil-derived EVs. Neutrophils were stimulated with fMLP (1 µM) and neutrophil-derived EVs were separated. Neutrophil-derived EVs were coated on filter membrane and visualized with scanning microscopy. (D) Representative picture of NDTRs. The size of particle ranged up to 502 nm. (E) Representative picture of NDMVs. The size of particle ranged up to 570 nm.

<!-- image -->

We  further  characterized  NDTRs  according  to the  guidelines  provided  by  minimal  information  for studies  of  extracellular  vesicles  2018  (MISEV2018) [31].  The sizes and numbers of NDTRs and NDMVs were  analyzed  using  nanotracking  analysis  (NTA) assay. NTA  revealed heterogeneity in the size distribution of spontaneously generated neutrophil-derived EVs (Figure 1C). The diameter of spontaneously generated neutrophil-derived EVs was between 50 and 600 nm (mode size, 73-350 nm). The sizes and diameters of neutrophil-derived EVs isolated from fMLP-stimulated neutrophils were not significantly  different  from  those  of  spontaneously generated neutrophil-derived EVs [Spontaneous versus fMLP-stimulated: NDTR, 226.5 ± 14.11 nm vs 232.1 ± 16.25 nm (mean size ± SEM); NDMVs, 211.5 ± 13.47 nm vs 227.2 ± 9.324 nm (mean size ± SEM)]. The scanning electron microscopic (SEM) analysis showed the  similar  oval-shaped  morphology  of  NDTRs  and NDMVs  (Figure  1D-E).  These  results  suggest  the robust structure of neutrophil-derived EVs, especially NDTRs, despite separation procedures.

To further investigate the mechanism underlying NDTR formation, we examined the effects of various inhibitors  on  the  formation  of  NDTRs.  Neutrophils were allowed to generate neutrophil-derived EVs in response  to  fMLP  in  the  presence  or  the  absence  of various  signaling  pathway  inhibitors.  PD90859  (an ERK  inhibitor),  SB203580  (a  p38  MAPK  inhibitor), BAPTA-AM  (a  Ca 2+ chelator), CaCCinh  (a  Ca 2+ activated  Cl channel  transmembrane  protein  16A inhibitor), Tat-C3 (a Rho inhibitor), NSC23766 (a Rac1 inhibitor), and ML141 (a Cdc42 inhibitor) attenuated the  formation  of  both  NDTRs  and  NDMVs  (Figure S1B).  However,  wortmannin  [a  phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor] significantly attenuated the formation  of  NDMVs  but  not  NDTRs  (Figure  S1B). Moreover,  IMB10  (a n  inhibitor  of  integrin  αM  and MAC-1) significantly inhibited the formation of NDTRs  but  slightly attenuated the formation of NDMVs  (Figure  S1B).  We  further  confirmed  these results  in  neutrophil-derived  EVs  stimulated  with PMA,  C5a,  and  TNFα  (Figure  S1B). Wortmannin significantly inhibited generation of NDMVs whereas IMB10 significantly inhibited formation of NDTRs in response to  stimulation  with  PMA,  C5a,  and  TNFα (Figure S1B). Since these results suggest the requirement of physical interactions for NDTR generation, we examined the effects of inhibitors on the migration of neutrophils. The accumulated distance traveled by neutrophils revealed the movement of neutrophils against known chemoattractive  molecules  for  neutrophils  such  as fMLP,  C5a,  HMBG1,  S100B, E.  coli and S.  aureus (Figure  S1C).  Interestingly,  neutrophils  also  showed

the enhanced chemokinesis against LPS, PMA, HMGB1,  TNFα,  TGF β,  IFN γ,  IL ---4,  and  L-NAME (Figure S1C). PD90859, SB205380, and IMB10 significantly inhibited movement of neutrophils against fMLP, PMA, C5a, and TNFα (Figure S1C).

To further characterize NDTRs, we assessed the expressions  of surface markers  on  NDTRs.  Flow cytometric  analysis  showed  NDTRs  shared  similar surface markers such as annexin A1 (AnxA1), phosphatidylserine [detected using annexin A5 (AnxA5)], tetraspanins (CD9, CD81, and CD63), granules  (CD66b,  and  CD35),  adhesion  molecules (CD11b, CD39d, CD29, and CD18), heat shock protein (HSP70),  and  monocyte  chemoattractant  protein  1 (MCP-1) (Figure S1D). Interestingly, NDTRs showed higher expressions of CD29  (integrin β1), CD43 (leukosialin), CD49d  (integrin  α4),  flotillin -1, and PSGL-1  (P-selectin  glycoprotein  ligand  1)  whereas NDMVs showed higher expression of CD16 (an Fcγ type III receptor) (Figure S1D). We further investigated contents of NDTRs  and  found  that NDTRs  contained  RNA  and  protein  but  not  DNA (Figure S1E-F). The concentrations of proteins retained in NDTRs and NDMVs were not significantly changed according to stimulators (Figure S1G).

## NDTRs exert bactericidal activity through ROS- and granule-dependent pathway

A previous study reported that NDMVs inhibit the growth of bacteria by inducing bacterial aggregation [16], hence we examined the bactericidal activity of NDTRs. E. coli and S. aureus were exposed to  neutrophil-derived  EVs  isolated  from  neutrophils stimulated  with  equivalent  amounts  of E.  coli or S. aureus .  Then,  the  survival  of  bacteria  was  analyzed (Figure 2A). Both NDTRs  and  NDMVs  showed significant  bactericidal  activity  against E.  coli and S. aureus (Figure 2B). Neutrophil-derived EVs are composed of plasma membranes and carry substantial amounts of proteins and RNA, hence, we hypothesized that the continual production of neutrophil-derived  EVs  might  negatively  influence the overall bactericidal activity of remnant neutrophils (RNs). Therefore, we examined the bactericidal  activity  of  RNs  after  the  generation  of neutrophil-derived EVs. Neutrophils were allowed to generate  either  NDTRs,  NDMVs,  or  both,  and  the bactericidal  activity  of  RNs  was  examined  (Figure 2A).  Interestingly,  RNs  exhibited  the  significantly diminished bactericidal activity against E. coli and S. aureus (Figure 2C), suggesting that neutrophil-derived EVs  might  be  involved  in  the  general  bactericidal activity of neutrophils.

Figure 2. NDTRs exert bactericidal activity via ROS- and granule-dependent pathway. (A) Schematic depiction of experimental design. (B) Bactericidal activity of neutrophil-derived EVs. Opsonized E. coli or S. aureus were exposed to neutrophil-derived EVs separated from neutrophils stimulated with respective bacteria. (C) Bactericidal activity of remnant neutrophils (RNs) after EV formations. RNs were recovered after generation of neutrophil-derived EVs. (D-E) The effects of inhibitors on the specific pathways for bactericidal activity by neutrophil-derived EVs. Bacteria were exposed to neutrophil-derived EVs in presence of absence of indicated inhibitors. Veh, DDW; DPI, an inhibitor of NDAPH oxidase, 10 µM; ProI, protease inhibitor cocktail, 10 µM; DNase, DNase I, 10 µM. The data are pooled from three independent experiments (n = 4-7 per each group) and shown as the mean ± SEM. * P &lt; 0.05; ** P &lt; 0.01; *** P &lt; 0.001.

<!-- image -->

Neutrophils exert their bactericidal activity through the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS), granules,  and  neutrophil  extracellular  traps  (NETs) [30].  We  next  evaluated  the  mechanism  underlying the bactericidal activity of neutrophil-derived EVs by inhibiting  each  pathway  of  bactericidal  activity.  The NADPH  oxidase  inhibitor (diphenyleneiodonium, DPI) and protease inhibitor (PI) cocktail significantly attenuated  the  bactericidal activity of neutrophilderived  EVs  (Figure  2D-E).  DNase,  an  inhibitor  of NETs,  did  not affect the bactericidal activity of neutrophil-derived  EVs  (Figure  2D-E).  We  further identified  whether  neutrophil-derived  EVs  generate ROS. A luminol assay showed that both neutrophilderived  EVs  generate  ROS  in  response  to  PMA stimulation  (Figure  S2A-B).  Moreover,  superoxide dismutase  (SOD)  activity  assay  and  cytochrome  c reduction  assay  showed  the  existence  of  functional units  for  ROS  generation  in  neutrophil-derived  EVs (Figure S2C-D). Collectively, these results suggest that both  NDTRs  and  NDMVs  exert  bactericidal  activity via ROS- and granule-dependent mechanisms.

## NDTRs induce monocyte chemotaxis through MCP-1

Since  we  found  the  expression  of  MCP-1  in

NDTRs and NDMVs, the effects of neutrophil-derived EVs on the chemotaxis of monocytes and macrophages were examined. One side of chemotaxis chamber was loaded with either NDTRs or NDMVs. Monocytes were isolated from peripheral mononuclear  cells  (PBMCs)  and  allowed  to  migrate toward  neutrophil-derived  EVs.  Monocytes  showed significant chemotaxis in a chemotaxis chamber coated  with  NDTRs  and  NDMVs  (Figure  3A-C). Monocyte also showed significant chemotaxis against direct NDTR  which  were  generated  by  allowing neutrophils to move toward indicated chemoattractants  (Figure  S3A).  Macrophages  were differentiated  from  monocytes  isolated  from  PBMCs and allowed to migrate neutrophil-derived EVs. Macrophages  did  not  show  chemotaxis  against  any type of neutrophil-derived EVs (Figure S3B).

We further examined the effects of pharmacological  inhibition  of  CCR2,  a  receptor  for MCP-1, on monocyte chemotaxis against neutrophilderived EVs. The CCR inhibition completely abolished  the  migration  of  monocytes  toward  to NDTRs and NDMVs (Figure 3B-C, +MCP-1 inhibitor). These  results  suggest  that  neutrophil-derived  EVs induce monocyte chemotaxis in an MCP-1-dependent manner.

Figure 3. NDTRs induce monocyte chemotaxis via an MCP-1-dependent pathway. (A-C) Neutrophils were stimulated with indicated stimulators and EVs were isolated. The lane was coated with isolated neutrophil-derived EVs and monocytes were allowed to migrate toward isolated neutrophil-derived EVs. The distances traveled by migrating cells were tracked on every minute for 45 min. Representative tracking results of thirty cells per each group are presented. (A) Monocyte migration tracking analysis. (B) The effects of MCP-1 inhibitor on chemotaxis of monocytes against neutrophil-derived EVs. Upper panels, monocytes were allowed to migrate toward MCP-1 (100 ng/mL) in the presence or absence of CCR1 antagonist. Middle and bottom panels, monocytes were allowed to migrate toward neutrophil-derived EVs in the presence of CCR2 antagonist (+MCP-1 inhibitor, 1 µg/mL). (C) Mean distance and velocity of monocytes traveled towards neutrophil-derived EVs. The data are shown as the mean ± SEM. * P &lt; 0.05; ** P &lt; 0.01; *** P &lt; 0.001. All data are representative of three independent experiments (n = 3-4 per group).

<!-- image -->

We next  examined  whether  neutrophil-derived EVs  induce  chemotaxis  of  neutrophils  themselves. Neutrophils showed efficient chemotaxis against both EVs,  and  LY223982  (a  leukotriene  B4  antagonist) completely abolished chemotaxis of neutrophils (Figure S3C).

## NDTRs induce proinflammatory phenotype polarization of M0-differentiated THP-1 cells

NDMVs  are  considered  to  be  generated  from

neutrophils in tissues [9, 10, 15, 28] whereas NDTRs are produced during migration toward inflammatory foci  and  guide  following  immune  cells  [3,  4].  We hypothesized that NDTRs might stimulate a pro-inflammatory  response  by  activating  following immune  cells  while  NDMVs  might  attenuate  an excessive  inflammation  by  suppressing  neighboring immune cells. Since both EVs enhanced chemotaxis of monocytes,  we  compared  the  effects  of  NDTRs  and NDMVs on the phenotypic polarization of monocytes

into macrophages. We first examined whether monocytes  directly  interact  with  neutrophil-derived EVs.  THP-1  cells,  human  monocytic  cell  line,  were differentiated  into  M0  macrophages  by  stimulation with  PMA  (100  ngl,  48  h)  and  were  exposed  to neutrophil-derived EVs in a microfluidic chamber. M0 macrophages  actively  migrated  toward  neutrophilderived  EVs  and  were  merged  with  fluorescencestained  neutrophil-derived  EVs  (Figure  4A,  Movie S3-4). Flow cytometric analysis further confirmed the increased EV uptake of neutrophil-derived EVs in M0 macrophages (Figure 4B).

Next,  we  evaluated  the  effects  of  NDTRs  and NDMVs on the phenotypic polarization of macrophages.  M0  macrophages  were  exposed  to either NDTRs  or  NDMVs  and  the  expression  of phenotypic markers were examined (Figure 4C). For comparison,  M0  macrophages  were  incubated  with either LPS/IFNγ or IL -4/IL-13 for differentiation into M1  or  M2  macrophages,  respectively  (Figure  4C). Interestingly, NDTRs and NDMVs  differentially induced the phenotypic polarization of M0 macrophages. NDTR-exposed M0 macrophages showed increased expression of phenotypic markers of  proinflammatory  macrophages,  such  as  inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), IL-12, and TNFα (Figure 4D-E). In contrast, NDMV-exposed M0 macrophages showed  upregulation of phenotype markers for anti-inflammatory macrophages, such as arginase-1 (Arg-1), IL-10, TGFβ, CD163, CD206, CD80,  and  CD86  (Figure  4D-E).  Undifferentiated THP-1  cells  did  not  show  significant  changes  in neither morphology nor M1/M2 markers in response to  stimulations  with  neutrophil-derived  EVs  (Figure S4A-C).  We  further  confirmed  these  results  using primary monocytes. Peripheral blood monocytes were  exposed  to  either  NDTRs  or  NDMVs  for  24  h and  the  expressions  of  phenotypic  markers  were examined (Figure S4D). NDTRs significantly enhanced  the expression of iNOS  and  CD80  in primary  monocytes  whereas  NDMVs  significantly enhanced the arginase expression (Figure S4D). Moreover,  the  iNOS/Arg1  ratio  was  significantly enhanced  in  NDTR-exposed  monocytes  whereas  it was decreased in NDMV-exposed monocytes (Figure S4D).  Based  on  these  results,  we  hypothesized  that NDTRs and NDMVs differentially induce macrophage polarization into proinflammatory phenotype and anti-inflammatory phenotype, respectively.

To confirm the requirement of vesicular structures on effector functions of neutrophil-derived EVs,  we  evaluated  the  effects  of  lysed  EVs.  NDTRs and NDMVs were successfully lysed with SDS (Figure S4E-F)  and  lysed  EVs  showed  negligible  effect  on

macrophage polarization  (Figure  S4G-H).  Moreover, lysed  EV  also  did  not  affect  bactericidal  activity (Figure S4I). To examine whether diffusible molecules mediate the effects of neutrophil-derived EVs, supernatants were collected from neutrophil-derived EVs and were further filtrated. The filtrated neutrophil-derived EVs did not affect neither macrophage polarization nor bactericidal activity (Figure  S4G-I).  We  further  confirmed  these  results using  Transwell  assay.  M0  macrophages  loaded  in upper chamber cells did not show significant changes in the expression of neither iNOS nor arginase against neutrophil-derived  EVs  loaded  in  bottom  chamber (Figure  S4G-H).  Next,  we  examined  whether  the physical interaction is required for effector functions of neutrophil-derived EVs. Both AnxA5 and anti-AnxA1 abolished the effect of neutrophil-derived EVs on macrophages (Figure S4G-H).

## NDTRs express proinflammatory miRNAs

miRNAs  are  small  noncoding  RNA  molecules that  post  transcriptionally  regulate  gene  expression. Various miRNAs are found in EVs and they mediate intercellular communications  [32-34]. Since recent studies indicate that miRNAs play a pivotal role in the phenotypic  polarization  of  macrophages  [35-37],  we performed miRNA sequencing (miRNA-seq) on neutrophil-derived EVs. Agilent human miRNA microarray  assay  was  performed  on  the  neutrophilderived EVs isolated from healthy volunteers (Figure 5A). The hierarchical clustering shows the differential miRNA  expression  patterns  between  NDTRs  and NDMVs (Figure 5B). Furthermore, analysis of differentially expressed miRNAs (adjusted p-value &lt; 0.05,  fold  change  ≥  1.5)  identified  40  miRNAs  with significantly different expression levels in NDTRs and NDMVs (Figure 5A). Among the top 10 differentially expressed miRNAs, six miRNAs (miR-122-5p, miR-1260a, miR-1285-5p, miR-24-3p, miR-29a-3p, and miR-4454+miR7975) were highly expressed in NDTRs, while three miRNAs (miR-126-3p, miR-1505p, and miR-451a) were highly expressed in NDMVs (Figure 5C). Next, RT-qPCR analysis was conducted to validate the differential miRNA  expression  in neutrophil-derived EVs. Cel-miR-39 was added to the samples  during  the  RNA  extraction  step  and  was used as an exogenous control for normalization. We found that four miRNAs (miR-1260, miR-1285, miR-4454,  and  miR-7975)  were  highly  expressed  in NDTRs, while three miRNAs (miR-126, miR-150, and miR-451a) were highly expressed in NDMVs (Figure 5D). To further confirm the involvement of miRNAs in macrophage polarization, M0-differentiated THP-1 cells were transfected with mimics of miRNAs differently expressed in NDTRs and NDMVs.

Interestingly,  the  transfection  with  miRNA  mimics highly expressed in NDTRs (miR-1260a, miR-1285-5p, miR-4454, and miR-7975) enhanced iNOS expressions in M0-differentiated THP-1  cells (Figure 5E). In

contrast, the transfection with miRNA mimics highly expressed  in  NDMVs  (miR-150-5p  and  miR-451a) enhanced  arginase  expressions  in  M0-differentiated THP-1 cells (Figure 5E).

Figure 4. NDTRs induce proinflammatory phenotype polarization of macrophages. (A-B) Phagocytosis of neutrophil-derived EVs by M0-differentiated THP-1 cells. (A) Time-lapse images of M0-differentiated THP-1 cells acquiring neutrophil-derived EVs. Microfluidic chamber was coated with neutrophil-derived EVs and M0-differentiated THP-1 cells were allowed to phagocytose. Green, neutrophil-derived EVs stained with Cell Tracker Green; Arrowheads, neutrophil-derived EVs attached to the plates; Arrows, neutrophil-derived EVs phagocytosed by M0-differentiated THP-1 cells. Representative images of three independent experiments. (B) Flow cytometric analysis showing the uptake of neutrophil-derived EVs by M0-differentiated THP-1 cells. n = 3 per group. (C) Schematic depiction of experimental design for macrophage phenotype polarization. (D-E) The expressions of markers for M1 and M2 in M0-differentiated THP-1 cells exposed to neutrophil-derived EVs (n = 3-4 per each group). (D) Fold changes in the expression levels of cytokines in M0-differentiated THP-1 cells exposed to neutrophil-derived EVs using qPCR (E) The expression levels of surface markers in M0-differentiated THP-1 cells exposed to neutrophil-derived EVs using flow cytometry. The data are shown as the mean ± SEM. * P &lt; 0.05; ** P &lt; 0.01; *** P &lt; 0.001 compared to control.

<!-- image -->

| NDTRs   | NDMVs   |      |
|---------|---------|------|
| 107.61  |         |      |
|         |         | 1.81 |

Figure 5. Proinflammatory miRNA profiles in NDTRs. (A) Hierarchical clustering of differentially expressed miRNAs in NDTRs and NDMVs. The miRNA profiles of NDTRs and NDMVs (n = 6 per group) clustered. Cluster analysis based on log10-transformed data. A red color represents relatively higher expression and a green color represents relatively lower expression. (B) Principal component analysis (PCA) plot of the miRNA expression profiles of NDTRs and NDMVs. (C) Summary of selected miRNAs differentially expressed in NDTRs and NDMVs. (D) Validation of selected miRNAs in NDTRs and NDMVs using RT-PCR (n = 10 per each group). (E) The effects of miRNA mimics (miR-1260a, miR-1285-5p, miR-4454, miR-7975, miR-126-3p, miR-150p, and miR-451a) on the expressions of iNOS and arginase in M0-differentiated THP-1 cells (n = 3 per each group). The data are shown as the mean ± SEM. * P &lt; 0.05; ** P &lt; 0.01; *** P &lt; 0.001.

<!-- image -->

## NDTRs exert protective effects against acute and chronic inflammation

We  next  evaluated  the  effects  of  NDTRs  and NDMVs on the murine models of acute and chronic inflammation.  Cecal-ligation  and  puncture  (CLP,  a murine model of experimental sepsis) [38] and chronic dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis [39] were  used  as  murine  models  for  acute  and chronic inflammation, respectively. BALB/c  mice were treated intraperitoneally with either NDTRs or NDMVs  30  min  prior  to  CLP  surgery  and  further treated on  days  1, 2, and  3  after CLP  surgery. NDTR-treated mice showed increased survival, while

NDMV-treated  mice  did  not show  any  survival benefit (Figure 6A). Peritoneal macrophages isolated from NDTR-injected mice showed higher expressions of iNOS, TNFα, MHC II, and CD163 with decreased expression of CD86 and TGFβ compared to peritoneal  macrophages  isolated  from  control  mice (Figure  6B).  Peritoneal  macrophages  isolated  from NDMV-injected mice showed decreased expression of IL-12  and  TGFβ  (Figure  6B).  We  further  examined cytokine  levels  in  peritoneal  fluid.  NDTR  injection attenuated the levels of IL1β and enhanced the level s of IL-6 (Figure 6C). NDMV injection did not affect the peritoneal cytokine levels (Figure 6C). For establishment of a chronic DSS-induced colitis, mice

were orally administered with two cycles of 2% DSS as previously described [39]. Either NDTRs or NDMVs were administered intraperitoneally on days 16,  18,  20,  and  22  (Figure  6D).  Interestingly,  NDTRs significantly attenuated  DSS-induced  reduction  of colon length, while NDMVs had no effect (Figure 6E). Moreover, NDTR  treatment  significantly reduced colon damage (Figure 6F).

Previously, neutrophil-derived EVs were suggested  as  markers  and  mediators  in  sepsis  [40]. Therefore, we examined the existence of NDTRs and NDMVs  in  serum  of  sepsis  patients  to  confirm  the clinical  relevance  of  neutrophil-derived  EVs.  Serum was obtained from 12 septic patients admitted to the intensive care units due to community-acquired pneumonia.  EVs  were  isolated  using  ExoQuick  and

further stained with AnxA5 (FITC), anti-CD16 antibody, and anti-CD66 antibody. Interestingly, the percentages of both NDTRs (CD66b +  AnnA5 +  CD16 - ) and NDMVs (CD66b +  AnnA5 +  CD16 + ) were higher in serum  of  sepsis  patients  than  in  those  of  healthy volunteers (Figure S6).

## Discussion

In this study, we investigated the characterization and  function of NDTRs.  NDTRs share  many  similarities  with  NDMVs.  NDTRs  were generated  by  stimulators  for  NDMVs  (Figure  1A-B) and  showed  similar  physical  characteristics  such  as diameter (Figure 1C), morphology (Figure 1D-E), and surface marker expressions (Figure S1D). Both NDTRs and NDMVs exerted bactericidal activities (Figure 2),

Figure 6. Protective effects of NDTRs on murine models of acute and chronic inflammation. (A) Effects of NDTRs and NDMVs in a murine model of sepsis. Experimental sepsis was induced by CLP. Survival rates of septic mice after the administration of neutrophil-derived EVs. BALB/c mice were administered an i.p. injection of either NDTRs (n = 8), NDMVs (n = 12) or vehicle (saline, n = 12) 1 h before surgery and on days 1 and 3 after surgery. * P &lt; 0.05 compared to vehicle. (B) The expressions of markers for M1 and M2 in peritoneal macrophages isolated from septic mice injected with neutrophil-derived EVs. (C) The cytokine levels of peritoneal fluid isolated from septic mice injected with neutrophil-derived EVs. (D-F) The effects of NDTRs and NDMVs in a murine model of chronic colitis. Mice were administered with two cycles of 2% DSS for 5 days. At the beginning of the second cycle, mice were treated with NDTRs and NDMVs on every 2 days. n = 4 per each group. (D) Percentage of initial weight. (E-F) Mice were sacrificed on day 22 and subjected to evaluation. (E) Left panel, colon length. Right panel, representative photographs of the colon and cecum. (F) Macroscopic colonic damage. Left panel, histological score. Right panel, representative images of hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E) staining. The arrows indicate crypt damage and inflammatory cell infiltration. The data are shown as the mean ± SEM. * P &lt; 0.05; ** P &lt; 0.01; *** P &lt; 0.001.

<!-- image -->

induced monocyte chemotaxis through MCP-1 (Figure  3)  and  were  uptaken  by  M0-differentiated THP-1  cells  (Figure  4A-B).  However,  the  generation mechanism  of  NDTRs  preferentially  depended  on integrin-mediated signaling whereas that of NDMVs depended on PI3K signaling (Figure S1B). Phenotypically, NDTRs  generally showed higher expression levels of PSGL-1 whereas NDMVs showed higher  expressions  of  CD16  (Figure  S1D).  Notably, NDTRs showed higher expressions of proinflammatory  miRNAs  (Figure  5)  and  induced proinflammatory phenotype polarization of macrophages (Figure 4D-E). Finally, NDTRs showed beneficial  effects in murine  models  of  acute  and chronic inflammation whereas NDMVs  did not (Figure 6).

Although  we  searched  for  specific  stimulators for NDTRs, most immunological stimuli induced both NDTR  and  NDMV  formations,  suggesting  that  the generation of NDTRs and NDMVs is not determined by stimulators that neutrophils encounter during the inflammatory process. However, we found a specific mechanism underlying the generation of neutrophil-derived EVs. Although neutrophil-derived EVs shared common mechanisms of generation (e.g., via  ERK MAPK, p38 MAPK, Rho, Rac1, Cdc42, and extracellular Ca 2+ ), the integrin signaling and the PI3K pathway were required for the generation of NDTRs and NDMVs, respectively (Figure S1B). These results suggest that the generation of NDTRs and NDMVs by neutrophils is dependent on the immunological environment  such  as  physical  interaction  through adhesion molecules, not the type of stimulation. We next tried to identify the specific markers of NDTRs. Although NDTRs shared most markers with NDMVs, we  found  surface  markers  differently  expressed  in neutrophil-derived EVs. NDMVs expressed relatively higher  levels  of  CD16  whereas  NDTRs  expressed relatively higher levels of PSGL1. CD16, an Fcγ type III receptor, is found on the surface of neutrophils [41] and is preferentially distributed on the leading edge in  migrating  neutrophils  [42].  In  contrast,  PSGL-1  is found  in the surface of resting neutrophils and redistribute to the uropods in response to chemoattractant stimulation [43]. NDTRs are generated from elongated uropods of migrating neutrophils  whereas  NDMVs  are  generated  from membrane  blebbing  from  neutrophils.  Hence,  the contribution  of this physical  characteristic to the generation mechanism might be responsible for differential expression patterns of these markers.

Both  NDTRs  and  NDMVs  killed  bacteria  via ROS- and granule-dependent mechanism (Figure 2). Although a previous study showed that NDMVs limit bacterial  growth  by  inducing  bacterial  aggregation

[16], the specific mechanism underlying the bactericidal activity of NDMVs  is incompletely understood. Both NDTRs and NDMVs  showed bactericidal activity via ROS- and granule-dependent mechanisms (Figure 2). Previous studies have reported that NDMVs can actively generate ROS [19, 26] and contain neutrophil granules such as myeloperoxidase [5, 15, 19], lactoferrin, elastase, and proteinase  [5,  6,  10,  12,  19].  Consistent  with  this hypothesis, we found that NDMVs are equipped with functional units of ROS generation and they actively generate in response to stimulation (Figure S2). Moreover,  the  inhibition  of  NADPH  oxidase  and proteases significantly attenuated the bactericidal activity of NDMVs  (Figure 2D-E). Interestingly, NDTRs  also  showed  bactericidal  activity  via  ROSand granule-dependent mechanisms (Figure 2D). Additionally, NDTRs  actively generated ROS  in response to PMA stimulation (Figure S2) and expressed various granule markers  (Figure S1C). Moreover, the bactericidal activity of NDTRs was also significantly attenuated by the NADPH  oxidase inhibitor and protease inhibitors (Figure 2D-E), suggesting that NDTRs not only guide the migration of immune cells to inflammatory foci but also provide a  defense  against  pathogens.  Moreover,  our  results suggest that neutrophil-derived EVs might be involved in the general bactericidal activity of neutrophils  (Figure  2C).  After  generation  of  EVs, neutrophils  exhibited  a  marked  decrease  in  overall bactericidal activity, suggesting that the generation of EVs leads  to  exhaustion  state  of  neutrophils  (Figure 2C).  Neutrophils  are  exposed  to  various  bacteriaderived  products  which  are  strong  stimulators  of neutrophil-derived  EVs  production.  Therefore,  our results suggest the possible involvement of neutrophil-derived  EVs  in  bactericidal process of neutrophils.

Previous  studies  reported  that  NDMVs  induce anti-inflammatory functions in neighboring cells. NDMV-exposed NK cells exhibited increased expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines and NDMVs inhibited the maturation of monocytes into dendritic cells [13]. Moreover, NDMVs inhibit proinflammatory  cytokine  expression  in  monocytes, macrophages [8, 9, 23, 28], and endothelial cells [11, 12].  In  contrast,  very  little  is  known  regarding  the effects of NDTRs  in cell-to-cell communications except  that  they  guide  following  CD8 +   T  cells  and monocytes  toward  inflammatory  foci  [3].  We  found that  neutrophil-derived  EVs  play  a  pivotal  role  in recruiting monocytes and skewing the differentiation of M0-differentiated THP-1 cells into either proinflammatory  or anti-inflammatory phenotype. Both  subtypes  of  neutrophil-derived  EVs  induced

monocyte chemotaxis (Figure 3) and were uptaken by M0-differentiated THP-1 cells (Figure 4A, B). Neutrophil-derived  EVs  showed  differential  effects on the phenotypic polarization of macrophages; NDTRs  induced  polarization  of  M0  macrophages toward a proinflammatory phenotype, whereas NDMVs  induced  of  M0  macrophages  polarization toward an anti-inflammatory phenotype (Figure 4C-E).

We found that miRNAs differentially expressed in NDTRs and NDMVs are responsible for macrophage  polarizations  into  different  phenotypes (Figure 5). Interestingly, most  miRNAs  found  in NDTRs are associated with proinflammatory responses  of  macrophages,  whereas  most  miRNAs found in NDMVs are associated with antiinflammatory  responses  of  macrophages.  miR-1260a and  miR-1285-5p  are  expressed  in  bacteria-infected macrophages  [44-46].  miR-122-5p  and  miR-29a-3p induce proinflammatory gene expression in macrophages [47, 48]. Moreover, miR-24-3p and miR-4454  are  found  in  monocyte-derived  dendritic cells [49] and alveolar macrophages [50]. In contrast, miR-126-3p  and  miR-150-5p  are  expressed  in  M2 polarized  macrophages  [51,  52]  and  are  associated with suppression of inflammation [53-56]. We identified differential miRNA expressions in NDTRs and NDMVs,  suggesting that neutrophils might incorporate different types of miRNAs  into  EVs according  to  the  immune  environments.  Since  the adhesion molecules differentiate the generation mechanism of NDTRs and NDMVs, signaling associated with adhesion molecules could be helpful to understand this phenomenon.

Although neutrophils are considered to generate different types  of EVs  according  to  the  immune environment [6, 16,  22,  57],  the  reason  has  not  been fully  understood.  Successful  inflammation  requires effective  initiation  and  resolution.  Since  neutrophils are  the  first  cells  recruited  to  sites  of  inflammation, they play a pivotal role in initiating inflammation [30, 58, 59]. Neutrophils actively participate in eliminating pathogens, guide following immune cells by releasing various  kinds  of chemokines  and  cytokines,  and modulate the functions of neighboring immune cells [27, 59]. Neutrophils also play an important role in the resolution of inflammation; they can persist at inflammatory foci during the entire process of inflammation  and  participate  in  the  resolution  of inflammation  by  releasing  proresolving  factors  [60]. The most prominent difference between NDTRs and NDMVs is the spatiotemporal generation mechanism; NDTRs  are  generated  from  neutrophils  migrating toward inflammatory foci, whereas NDMVs  are thought  to  be  generated  from  neutrophils  that  have

arrived at inflammatory foci. Therefore, NDTRs might augment the proinflammatory responses of accompanying  immune  cells  to  combat  imminent inflammatory  insults,  whereas  NDMVs  might  limit excessive inflammation by enhancing the anti-inflammatory responses of immune  cells at inflammatory foci. Interestingly, NDTRs and NDMVs showed  differential effects in murine  models  of inflammation. NDTRs reduced lethality in the murine model of sepsis (Figure 6A) and pathological changes in the murine model of chronic colitis (Figure 6D-F). Although  bactericidal  activity  of  neutrophil-derived EVs might explain the beneficial effects of NDTRs in murine models of inflammation, we did not find any beneficial effect of NDMVs despite their bactericidal activity. A possible explanation of this contradictory effects is the differential effects of neutrophil-derived EVs  on  macrophages.  Immune  responses  in  sepsis composed both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory responses. Excessive immune responses such as cytokine storm are detrimental to patients with sepsis and either dysregulated or compromised immune responses are also detrimental to hosts [61]. Macrophages play a pivotal role throughout pathogenesis of sepsis. Although macrophages are responsible for excessive production of proinflammatory cytokines during sepsis, they also show  immune  paralyzed  phenotype  during  sepsis [61]. Indeed, the induction of proinflammatory macrophages  protect  against  CLP-induced  lethality [62, 63]. NDTRs contained proinflammatory miRs and induced proinflammatory phenotype polarization of macrophages,  hence  this  might  explain  beneficial effects in murine model of inflammations. In contrast, NDMVs  showed  negligible  effects  on  the  overall outcomes in our in vivo inflammation models despite their effects on  macrophages.  However,  previous study showed the beneficial anti-inflammatory effect of NDMVs in chronic inflammation. The intra-articular injection of NDMVs decreased cartilage damage in a murine model of inflammatory arthritis by  enhancing  TGFβ  production  from  ch ondrocytes [17].  Since  our  study  showed  that  NDMVs  promote anti-inflammatory macrophage polarization, it could be  additional  mechanism  underlying  the  beneficial effect of NDMVs on inflammatory arthritis. However, additional in  vivo studies  are  needed  to  verify  the anti-inflammatory effects of NDMVs. Moreover, neutrophil-derived EVs, exosome, exacerbate chronic inflammatory  disease  such  as  chronic  obstructive pulmonary disease and bronchopulmonary dysplasia [64],  hence studies regarding therapeutic application of neutrophil-derived EVs should be addressed carefully.

In conclusion,  our  study  provides  important insight  into  the  differential  functions  of  neutrophilderived EVs; proinflammatory NDTRs  and  antiinflammatory NDMVs. NDTRs guide monocytes and induce polarization toward proinflammatory macrophages,  thereby  contributing  to  the  effective initiation of inflammation. On the other hand, NDMVs  have  similar  characteristics  to  NDTRs,  but they induce macrophage polarization into an anti-inflammatory phenotype. Therefore, modulating neutrophil-derived  EV  generation  might  be  a  new strategy for control of inflammation.

## Material and methods

## Neutrophil isolation

Human  blood  experiment  was  approved  by Institutional Research Board of Kyungpook National University and Hallym University. Neutrophils were purified using histopaque (Sigma-Aldrich) centrifugation followed by Dextran sedimentation as described previously [65]. Briefly, venous blood was drawn  from  healthy  male  volunteers,  layered  over histopaque 1077 (Sigma-Aldrich), and centrifuged at 1400  ×  g  for  30  mins  at  RT.  Neutrophil-containing layer  was  collected  and  sedimented  with  5%  (w/v) dextran (Pharmacosmos) for 45 min at 4 °C. Neutrophil-rich  layer  was  collected  and  remaining red blood cells were removed using hypotonic lysis. Neutrophils were finally resuspended and incubated in  RPMI  1640  (Gibco)  supplemented  with  5%  Fetal bovine serum (FBS, HyClone) for maintaining neutrophil  function.  The  purity  of  neutrophils  was consistently greater than 95% determined by WrightGeimsa staining. All the experiments regarding NDTRs and NDMVs were conducted in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 5% FBS unless otherwise indicated.

## Live cell imaging of NDMV and NDTR formation

Neutrophils  (5  ×  10 6 cells) were  stained  cell tracker green (1.52.0 μg/mL, Invitrogen) and incubated in either μ -slide chamber (Ibidi) pre-coated with  fibronectin (5 μg/mL,  Merck  Millipore)  for evaluation  of  NDTR  formation  or  in  confocal  plates for evaluation of NDMV formation. Neutrophils were stimulated  with  vari ous  stimulators:  fMLP  (1  μM, SigmaAldrich),  LPS (1  μg/mL, Sigma -Aldrich),  C5a (50 ng/mL, Sino Biologicals), S100B (100 ng/mL, Sino Biologicals),  HMGB1  (100  ng/mL,  Sino  Biologicals), TNFα (50 ng/mL,  Sino  Biologicals), IFN γ -(100 ng/mL,  Sino  Biologicals),  TGFβ  (20  ng/mL,  Sino Biologicals), IL-4 (20 ng/mL, Sino Biologicals), PMA (100  μg/mL, Sigma -Aldrich),  and  N  omega-Nitro-L-

methyl  ester  hydrochloride  (L-NAME,  10 μM,  Tocris  bioscience).  Then,  EV  formations  were visualized by immunofluorescence microscopy (Olympus  IX83,  Olympus)  at  37  °C,  5%  CO2  for  1 hour.

## Separation of neutrophil-derived EVs

For  separation  of  NDTRs,  neutrophils  (5  ×  10 6 cells) were  seeded  on  culture  plates  coated  with fibronectin (5 μg /mL, Merck Millipore) and stimulated  with  stimulators  for  20  min.  Neutrophils and  media  were  discarded  from  fibronectin-coated plated and adherent NDTRs were recovered using cell scraper.  For  separation  of  NDMVs,  neutrophils  (5  × 10 6 cells) were  seeded  on  the  culture  plate  and stimulated with stimulators for 20 min. Supernatants were collected from uncoated plates and were subjected  to  purification.  The  remnant  neutrophils and debris were further removed by centrifugation at 700 × g and filtration through 1 .2 μm filter (Minisart Syringe  Filter,  Sartorius).  The  filtered  EV-containing supernatants were concentrated using ultra-centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 60 min at 4 °C. The concentrated EVs were dissolved in 100 μL RPMI and stored at -70 °C (maximum for 15 days). According to the concentration of neutrophils used in each experiment, EVs isolated from equivalent concentrations of neutrophils were used. The apoptotic  rates  of  neutrophils  at  the  time  of  EV harvest  was  examined  using  annexin  V/propidium iodide (PI) apoptosis assay. Flow cytometric analysis showed  that  more  than  95%  of  neutrophils  were negative for annexin  V/PI  staining, which  were general apoptotic rates of neutrophils incubated less than  five hours.  Since  our  experimental  protocol provide neutrophil-derived EVs at high recovery with low specificity, vehicles were prepared for neutrophil non-containing  groups.  Vehicles  for  NDMVs  were prepared from supernatants of media without neutrophils. Vehicles for NDTRs were prepared from scrapping fibronectin-coated plates without neutrophils. Then vehicles were centrifuged, filtered through 1.2  μm  filter,  and  concentrated  using  ultra -centrifugation. No visible pellets were found in both vehicles, and they were suspended in 100 μL phenol red-free RPMI and employed as vehicles.

## Quantification of NDMV and NDTR

Neutrophils  (5  ×  10 6   cells)  were  stained  with calceinAM (20 μg/mL, Merck Millipore) and stimulated  with  various  stimulators:  fMLP  (1  μM), LPS (1 μg/mL), E. coli (1 × 10 6  cells), S. aureus (1× 10 6 cells),  C5a (50 ng/mL), S100B (100 ng/mL), HMGB1 (100 ng/mL), TNFα (50 ng/mL), IFN γ (100 ng/mL), -TGFβ (20 ng/mL), IL -4 (20 ng/mL),  PMA  (100

μg/mL),  and  L NAME  (10  μM).  Then  neutrophil --derived EVs were isolated and the fluorescence were measured using Spectramax M2/e fluorescence microplate reader (Molecular Devices).

## Characterization of NDTRs using scanning electron microscopy and nanoparticle tracking analysis

EVs  generated  from  neutrophils  (2  ×  10 9   cells) were  examined  using  scanning  electron  microscopy (SEM) as previously described [66]. Briefly, EVs were absorbed on the surface of filter disc, incubated in 3% glutaraldehyde  (Sigma-Aldrich),  dehydrated  using ethanol (Merk Millipore), dried with liquid CO2, and sputtered  with  osmium.  Samples  were  visualized using  Hitachi  SU8229  scanning  electron  microscope (Hitachi). Neutrophil-derived EVs were characterized using Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). EVs were re-suspended in PBS and analyzed with the Nanosight LM10 nanoparticle characterization system (Malvern Instruments). Samples were manually injected  into  the  sample  chamber  and  each  sample was measured in duplicate with an acquisition time of 30 sec and detection threshold setting 7. At least 975 frames  were  analyzed  per  video.  NTA  analytical software version 3 was  used  for capturing and analyzing data.

## Bactericidal activity

Neutrophils  (10 8 cells) were  stimulated  with either  opsonized E.  coli (DH5α,  10 7 cells,  American Type Culture Collection, ATCC) or S. aureus (10 7 cells, ATCC) for 30 min on the either uncoated culture plate or fibronectin-coated culture plate. EVs were isolated according  to  the  procedure  as  described  except  the exposure to penicillin-streptomycin (Pen-Strep, Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min before ultracentrifugation. Either E. coli (10 9   cells) and S. aureus (10 9 cells)  were opsonized for 30 min with autologous serum (100 μL). Opsonized E. coli (10 7  cells)  and  S.  aureus  (10 7  cells) were exposed to either NDTRs and NDMVs (2 × 10 9 particles  per  each  group)  which  were  isolated  from neutrophils stimulated with respective bacteria for 30 min.  Bacteria  were  washed  and  seeded  on  the  agar plate. For comparison of bactericidal activity, bacteria were  exposed  to  neutrophils  (10 8   cells)  for  30  min, cells  were  lysed  with  chilled  DDW,  and  remnant bacteria were seeded on agar plates. The percentages of killing were calculated as: percentages of killing (%) =  [1  -  (colony  counts  in  experimental  group/colony counts  in  vehicle  (DDW)-treated  group)  ×  100].  For inhibition  of  specific  bactericidal  pathways,  bacteria were exposed to neutrophil EVs in presence of either protease  inhibitor  cocktail  (10  μM,  Sigma -Aldrich), diphenylene iodonium (DPI, 10 μM, Molecular

Probes), or DNase I (10 μM, Bio basic). For ba ctericidal activities of remnant  neutrophils,  neutrophils  (10 8 cells) were  allowed  to  generate  either  NDTRs  or NDMVs in presence  or  absence  of  stimulation  with respective  bacteria.  Then  neutrophils  were  carefully recovered by removing of EVs using centrifugation at 1400 × g, treated with pen-strep for 30 min, and the bactericidal  activities  of  recovered  neutrophils  (10 8 cells)  against  bacteria  (10 7   cells)  were  examined.  For generation of remnant neutrophils after generation of both EVs, neutrophils were first allowed to generate NDTRs against bacteria, neutrophils were recovered, and were further allowed to generate NDMVs against respective bacteria. Remnant neutrophils were recovered  and  subjected  to  bactericidal  assay.  For generation of control neutrophils after NDTR formation [Con (NDTR)], neutrophils were allowed to adhere  on  the  fibrinogen-coated  plates,  treated  with vehicles (either DDW or DMSO), and harvested with gentle scrapping. For generation of control neutrophils  after  NDMV  formation  [Con  (NDMV)], neutrophils were suspended in media without stimulation and harvested. For generation of control neutrophils after NDTR and NDMV formation [Con (both)], neutrophils were harvested from fibrinogencoated plates, resuspended in media without stimulation, and harvested.

## Monocyte isolation

Monocytes were obtained from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) layer obtained after histopaque centrifugation by using percoll solution as described  previously  [67].  PBMCs  were  layered  on hyper-osmotic  percoll  solution  (GE  healthcare  Life science) and further purified using iso-osmotic percoll solution. Macrophages were differentiated from monocytes by incubation with granulocytesmacrophage  colony  stimulating  factor  (GM-CSF,  10 ng/mL, Bio Legend) in RPMI supplemented with 5% FBS for 5 days. Cells (10 6  cells) were exposed to either NDTR (10 8  particles) and NDMV (10 8  particles) for 24 h.  For  comparison,  cells  were  exposed  to  either  LPS (100 ng/mL) and IFNγ (10 ng/mL) for M1 polarization  or  IL-4  (10  ng/mL)  and  recombinant human  IL-12  (10  ng/mL,  Sinobiologicals)  for  M2 polarization.

## Chemotaxis assay

Migration of monocytes against neutrophilderived EVs were determined using μ -slide chamber (ibidi) following manufacturer's instruction. One side of chemotaxis chamber was loaded with either NDTRs or NDMVs, and monocytes were allowed to migrate.  For  comparison,  chemotaxis  chamber  was loaded  with  MCP1  (100  μg/mL),  and  migration  of

monocytes were measured. For inhibition of monocyte  chemotaxis  against  EVs,  cells  were  pretreated  with  CCR2  (a  receptor  for  MCP-1)  inhibitor (CCR2 inhibitor, 1 μg/mL, Santa Cruz) for 30 min and allowed to migrate toward EVs in presence of CCR2 inhibitor.  The  cell  movement  were  visualized  and captured  by  Nikon  Eclipse  Ni-U  microscope  using 20X objective. The movement  of  cells was  then analyzed using ImageJ [68] and Chemotaxis/ migration tool (ibidi).

## Polarization of differentiated THP-1

THP-1  cells  were  purchased  from  Korean  Cell Line  Bank.  THP-1  cells  were  maintained  at  5  ×  10 6 cells/mL  in  RPMI  (Gibco)  supplemented  with  10% heat-inactivated  FBS  (HyClone,  GE  healthcare  Life Sciences)  with  1%  penicillin/streptomycin  (SigmaAldrich). THP-1  cells  were  differentiated  into  M0 macrophages  by  treatment  with  PMA  (100  ng/mL) for 48 h. M0-differentiated THP-1 cells (10 6  cells) were exposed  to  NDTRs  (10 8  particles)  and  NDMVs  (10 8 particles)  which  were  isolated from  neutrophils (5 × 10 6 cells) stimulated with fMLP (1 μM). For comparison, M0-differentiated THP-1 cells were stimulated with either LPS (100 ng/mL) and IFNγ (10 ng/mL) for M1 polarization or IL-4 (10 ng/mL) and recombinant human IL-12 (10 ng/mL, Sinobiologicals) for M2 polarization. For evaluation of macrophage phenotype polarization, polarized-THP1  cells  were  detached  using  trypsin  supplemented with EDTA (Life Technologies), fixed with Phosflow buffer  (BD  biosciences),  and  further  stained  with fluorescence-labeled anti-human monoclonal antibodies:  CD14  (PerCP,  BD  biosciences),  HLA-DR (APC, BD biosciences), CD80 (PE, Bio Legend), CD86 (PE,  Bio  Legend),  CD209  (APC,  Bio  Legend),  CD23 (APC,  Bio  Legend),  CD163  (PE,  Bio  Legend),  and CD206 (FITC, BD biosciences). Flow cytometric analysis was made  using BD  FAC  calibur and analyzed  using  FlowJo  software.  For  evaluation  of cytokine expressions, RNA was extracted from polarized-THP-1  cells  using  TRIzol  (Ambion)  and cDNA  was  synthesized  using  RT 2   First  strand  kit according to manufacturer's recommended protocols (Qiagen).  RT-qPCR  was  performed  by  using  cDNA (100  ng),  primer  (1  μL)  and  RT 2 SYBR  Green  qPCR mastermix (Qiagen) using Qiagen rotor. Briefly, reactions were performed under the suggested cycling conditions: polymerase activation for 10 min at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles of 15 s at 95 °C and 45 s at  60  °C.  For  all  PCR  experiments,  post-PCR  DNA melt curve analysis was performed to assess amplification  specificity.  DNA  melting  was  carried out using a temperature ramping rate of 1 °C per step with  a  5-second  rest  at  each  step.  Pre-designed  RT 2

qPCR primer assays (Qiagen) were used to determine the expression level of cytokines: iNOS  (NOS2, PPH00173F), Arg-1 (PPH20977A), TNFα (PPH00341F), TGFβ1 (PPH00508A), IL -10 (PPH00572C), IL-12A (PPH00544B), IL-6 (PPH00560C), and IL1β (PPH00171C). Gene expression  level  were  calculated  as  log2(2 ΔΔct )  using GAPDH (PPH00150F) as a control. In transwell assay, bottom chamber was loaded with neutrophil-derived EVs and M0-differentiated THP-1 cells were cultured in  upper  chamber  for  4  h.  Then,  THP-1  cells  were harvested and subjected to qPCR.

## The uptake of neutrophil EVs by THP-1 cells

Neutrophils  stained  with  cell  tracker  green  (5 μg/mL, Invitrogen) were stimulated with fMLP and EVs were isolated. M0-differentiated THP-1 cells were exposed to neutrophil-derived EVs on a confocal dish and visualized using immunofluorescence microscopy  at  37  °C,  5%  CO2  for  1  h.  For  flow cytometric  analysis, M0-differentiated  THP-1  cells were  exposed  to  EVs  for  indicated  time.  The  cells were harvested, fixed with phosflow fix buffer, permeabilized  with  perm  buffer,  and  stained  with fluorescence-conjugated antibodies against CD14 (PE) and CD66b (FITC). The fluorescence levels of CD66b in CD14+ M0-differentiated THP-1 cells were examined.  Sample  acquisition  was  performed  with BD  FACS  Calibur  (BD  Biosciences).  The  data  was analyzed using FlowJo software.

## miRNA array and validation

Total  RNA  was  isolated  from  neutrophil  EVs using the miRNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen, USA) following the manufacturer's protocol. The purity and concentration of the isolated RNA was measured with Nanodrop  ND-1000  spectrophotometer  (Nanodrop Technologies, USA). An equal amount (20 ng) of total RNA  was  converted  to  cDNA  using  the  TaqMan MicroRNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems, USA). 3 μL of RT product from total RNA was  containe d in a reaction volume of 10 μL with TaqMan Universal Master Mix II (Applied Biosystems) and TaqMan probe (hsa-miR-24-3p, hsamiR-29a-3p, hsa-miR-122-5p, hsa-miR-126-3p, hsamiR-150-5p,  hsa-miR-451a,  hsa-miR-1260a,  hsa-miR1285-5p, hsa-miR-4454, hsa-miR-7975) The expression levels of selected miRNAs were analyzed according to the  TaqMan MicroRNA Assay protocol in triplicate. Cel-miR-39  was  added  in  the  samples  during  the RNA extraction step and was used as an exogenous control  for  normalization  of  raw  data.  The  miRNA profile of the samples was analyzed with Nanostring nCounter TM  system. The effects of miRNAs (has-miR1260a, hsa-miR-1285-5p, hsa-miR-4454, hsa-miR-7975,

hsa-miR-126-3p,  hsa-miR-150-5p,  and  hsa-miR-451a) on the phenotype polarization of macrophages were confirmed.  M0-differentiated  THP-1  (1  ×  10 6   cells) were  transfected  with  50  nM  of  indicated  miRNA mimics (Applied Biological Materials) using NEPA21 (NEPA gene) and incubated for 24 h in RPMI. RNA was  extracted and the expression of iNOS  and Arginase were determined by quantitative PCR.

## Animal experiments

Animal experiments were approved by the Institutional  Animal  Care  and  Use  Committee  of Kyungpook National University and Hallym University. BALB/c (male, 5-8 weeks old) mice were purchased from Orient Bio. Bone marrow cells were isolated as previously described [69] and neutrophils were  isolated  using  either  neutrophil  isolation  kit (Miltenyi Biotec) or EasySep TM mouse  neutrophil enrichment kit (StemCell technologies) as previously described  [38].  EVs  were  separated  by  stimulating mouse neutrophils (5 × 10 6  cells/mL) with E. coli (1 × 10 6   cells/mL).  EVs  were  dissolved  in  100 μ L  RPMI and stored at -70 ℃ . Experimental sepsis was induced in  BALB/c  mice  by  the  cecal  ligation  and  puncture (CLP)  procedure  as  previously  described  Mice  were treated with either NDTRs (10 8  particles, 100 μ L, i.p.), NDMVs  (10 8 particles, 100 μ L, i.p.) or vehicle (saline,100 μ L,  i.p.)  30  min  before  CLP  surgery,  and further treated on day 1, 2, and 3 after CLP surgery. The survival of septic mice was monitored for 9 days. Peritoneal fluids were collected 18 h after CLP surgery, centrifuged at 1400 × g, and filtered through 1.2 μ m filter. Supernatants and cells were subjected to enzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assay  (ELISA)  and macrophage isolation, respectively. The concentration of IL1β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α were measured using ELISA kit (R&amp;D systems). Peritoneal macrophages were isolated using macrophage isolation  kit  (Miltenyi  Biotec)  and  subjected  to  flow cytometric analysis. DSS-induced chronic colitis was performed according to previous study [39]. In brief, BALB/c  mice  received  water  containing  2%  DSS during  first 5 days  and  further  received  normal drinking  water  for  10  days.  At  day  16,  mice  were exposed to water containing 2% DSS again until day 22. Mice were treated with NDTRs and NDMVs (10 8 particles, 100 μL, i.p.) on days 16, 18, 20, and 22. Mice were  sacrificed on day  22 and  colon size were measured, and the colons were prepared for histological analysis as previously described [39].

## Statistical analysis

Data  are  presented  as  the  mean  ±  SEM  for continuous  variables  and  as  the  number  (%)  for  the categorical variables. Statistical data were analyzed by

Graphpad prism 7.0e (GraphPad Software). Comparisons  between  two  groups  were  performed with either two-tailed Student's t test (parametric) or Mann-Whitney  (non-parametric  test).  Survival  data were analyzed using Mantel-Cox log-rank test. Values of p &lt;  0.05  were  considered  to  indicate  statistical significance.

## Summary

Neutrophils generate different types of extracellular  vesicles.  In  this  study,  we  found  that neutrophil-derived  trails  are  proinflammatory  extracellular  vesicles.  Neutrophil-derived  trails  contained proinflammatory miRNAs, induced proinflammatory macrophage  phenotype  polarization,  and  showed protective  effects  in  murine  models  of  acute  and chronic inflammation.

## Key points

- · Neutrophil-derived trails contain proinflammatory miRNAs and induce proinflammatory macrophage polarization;
- · Neutrophil-derived trails show protective effects in murine models of acute and chronic inflammation.

## Abbreviations

EV,  extracellular vesicle; NDMV,  neutrophilderived microvesicles; NDTR, neutrophil-derived trails; NK cells, natural killer cells; MoDCs, monocytederived dendritic cells; CXCL12,  CXC-chemokine ligand  12; PAMPs,  pathogen-associated  molecular patterns; fMLP, formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine;  LPS,  lipopolysaccharide; E.  coli , Escherichia coli ; S. aureus , Staphylococcus aureus ;  DAMPs, dangerassociated molecular patterns; HMGB1, high mobility group box 1; TNFα,  tumor  necrosis  factor α;  IFN γ, --interferonγ; TGF β,  tumor  growth  factor β;  IL ---4, interleukin-4; LNAME, N(γ) -nitro-L-arginine methyl ester;  PMA, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase.

## Supplementary Material

Supplementary figures.

http://www.thno.org/v11p2770s1.pdf

Supplementary tables.

http://www.thno.org/v11p2770s2.xlsx

Supplementary movie S1.

http://www.thno.org/v11p2770s3.mov

Supplementary movie S2.

http://www.thno.org/v11p2770s4.mov

Supplementary movie S3.

http://www.thno.org/v11p2770s5.mov

Supplementary movie S4.

http://www.thno.org/v11p2770s6.mov

## Acknowledgements

We  would  like  to  thank  Jae-Bong  Park  for providing Rho inhibitors. This study was supported by 2017R1C1B2009015, 2017R1A4A1015652, 2019R1A2C1087814, and 2020R1A4A2002691 from National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF).

## Author contributions

Y. J. Youn, S. Shrestha, J. K. Kim, Y. B. Lee, J. H. Lee,  N.  M.  Mali,  S.  Lee  and  S.  H.  Kim  conducted experiments.  Y.  J.  Youn  and  S.  Shrestha  designed experiments,  analyzed  results,  and  wrote  the  paper. K. Hur, S. W. Nam, D. K. Song, H. K Jin, and J. S. Bae assisted  experimental  design,  contributed  reagents, and provided key advices. C. W. Hong conceived and designed  the research, analyzed data, wrote the manuscript, provided financial support, and approved the final paper.

## Competing Interests

The  authors  have  declared  that  no  competing interest exists.

## References

- 1. Thery C, Ostrowski M, Segura E. Membrane vesicles as conveyors of immune responses. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009; 9: 581-93.
- 2. van der Pol E, Boing AN, Gool EL, Nieuwland R. Recent developments in the nomenclature, presence, isolation, detection and clinical impact of extracellular vesicles. J Thromb Haemost. 2016; 14: 48-56.
- 3. Lim K, Hyun YM, Lambert-Emo K, Capece T, Bae S, Miller R, et al. Neutrophil trails guide influenza-specific CD8(+) T cells in the airways. Science. 2015; 349: aaa4352.
- 4. Hyun YM, Sumagin R, Sarangi PP, Lomakina E, Overstreet MG, Baker CM, et al.  Uropod  elongation  is  a  common  final  step  in  leukocyte  extravasation through inflamed vessels. J Exp Med. 2012; 209: 1349-62.
- 5. Gasser O, Hess C, Miot S, Deon C, Sanchez JC, Schifferli JA. Characterisation and properties of ectosomes released by human polymorphonuclear neutrophils. Exp Cell Res. 2003; 285: 243-57.
- 6. Dalli J, Montero-Melendez T, Norling LV, Yin X, Hinds C, Haskard D, et al. Heterogeneity  in  neutrophil  microparticles  reveals  distinct  proteome  and functional properties. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013; 12: 2205-19.
- 7. Eken C, Gasser O, Zenhaeusern G, Oehri I, Hess C, Schifferli JA. Polymorphonuclear neutrophil-derived ectosomes interfere with the maturation of monocyte-derived dendritic cells. J Immunol. 2008; 180: 817-24.
- 8. Eken C, Martin PJ, Sadallah S, Treves S, Schaller M, Schifferli JA. Ectosomes released  by  polymorphonuclear  neutrophils  induce  a  MerTK-dependent anti-inflammatory pathway in macrophages. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285: 39914-21.
- 9. Eken  C, Sadallah S, Martin PJ, Treves S, Schifferli JA. Ectosomes  of polymorphonuclear  neutrophils  activate  multiple  signaling  pathways  in macrophages. Immunobiology. 2013; 218: 382-92.
- 10. Hess C, Sadallah S, Hefti A, Landmann R, Schifferli JA. Ectosomes released by human  neutrophils  are  specialized  functional  units.  J  Immunol.  1999;  163: 4564-73.
- 11. Mesri M, Altieri DC. Endothelial cell activation by leukocyte microparticles. J Immunol. 1998; 161: 4382-7.
- 12. Mesri  M,  Altieri  DC.  Leukocyte  microparticles  stimulate  endothelial  cell cytokine  release  and  tissue  factor  induction  in  a  JNK1  signaling  pathway.  J Biol Chem. 1999; 274: 23111-8.
- 13. Pliyev  BK,  Kalintseva  MV,  Abdulaeva  SV,  Yarygin  KN,  Savchenko  VG. Neutrophil  microparticles  modulate  cytokine  production  by  natural  killer cells. Cytokine. 2014; 65: 126-9.
- 14. Pluskota E, Woody NM, Szpak D, Ballantyne CM, Soloviev DA, Simon DI, et al.  Expression,  activation,  and  function  of  integrin  alphaMbeta2  (Mac-1)  on neutrophil-derived microparticles. Blood. 2008; 112: 2327-35.
- 15. Slater TW,  Finkielsztein  A,  Mascarenhas  LA,  Mehl  LC,  Butin-Israeli  V, Sumagin  R.  Neutrophil  Microparticles  Deliver  Active  Myeloperoxidase  to

- Injured Mucosa To Inhibit Epithelial Wound Healing. J Immunol. 2017; 198: 2886-97.
- 16. Timar CI, Lorincz AM, Csepanyi-Komi R, Valyi-Nagy A, Nagy G, Buzas EI, et al.  Antibacterial  effect  of  microvesicles  released  from  human  neutrophilic granulocytes. Blood. 2013; 121: 510-8.
- 17. Headland  SE,  Jones  HR,  Norling  LV,  Kim  A,  Souza  PR,  Corsiero  E,  et  al. Neutrophil-derived  microvesicles  enter  cartilage  and  protect  the  joint  in inflammatory arthritis. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7: 315ra190.
- 18. Stein  JM,  Luzio  JP.  Ectocytosis  caused  by  sublytic  autologous  complement attack on human neutrophils. The sorting of endogenous plasma-membrane proteins and lipids into shed vesicles. Biochem J. 1991; 274 ( Pt 2): 381-6.
- 19. Hong Y, Eleftheriou D, Hussain AA, Price-Kuehne FE, Savage CO, Jayne D, et al.  Anti-neutrophil  cytoplasmic  antibodies  stimulate  release  of  neutrophil microparticles. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012; 23: 49-62.
- 20. Kambas K, Chrysanthopoulou A, Vassilopoulos D, Apostolidou E, Skendros P, Girod A, et al. Tissue factor expression in neutrophil extracellular traps and neutrophil  derived  microparticles  in  antineutrophil  cytoplasmic  antibody associated vasculitis may promote thromboinflammation and the thrombophilic  state  associated  with  the  disease.  Ann  Rheum  Dis.  2014;  73: 1854-63.
- 21. Dalli J, Norling LV, Renshaw D, Cooper D, Leung KY, Perretti M. Annexin 1 mediates the rapid anti-inflammatory effects of neutrophil-derived microparticles. Blood. 2008; 112: 2512-9.
- 22. Duarte TA, Noronha-Dutra AA, Nery JS, Ribeiro SB, Pitanga TN, Lapa ESJR, et al. Mycobacterium tuberculosis-induced neutrophil ectosomes decrease macrophage activation. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2012; 92: 218-25.
- 23. Prakash  PS,  Caldwell  CC,  Lentsch  AB,  Pritts  TA,  Robinson  BR.  Human microparticles  generated  during  sepsis  in  patients  with  critical  illness  are neutrophil-derived and modulate the immune response. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012; 73: 401-6; discussion 6-7.
- 24. Gasser O, Schifferli JA. Activated polymorphonuclear neutrophils disseminate anti-inflammatory microparticles by ectocytosis. Blood. 2004; 104: 2543-8.
- 25. Nolan S, Dixon R, Norman K, Hellewell P, Ridger V. Nitric oxide regulates neutrophil migration through microparticle formation. Am J Pathol. 2008; 172: 265-73.
- 26. Pitanga  TN,  de  Aragao  Franca  L,  Rocha  VC,  Meirelles  T,  Borges  VM, Goncalves MS, et al. Neutrophil-derived microparticles induce myeloperoxidase-mediated  damage  of  vascular  endothelial  cells.  BMC  Cell Biol. 2014; 15: 21.
- 27. Soehnlein O, Steffens S, Hidalgo A, Weber C. Neutrophils as protagonists and targets in chronic inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol. 2017; 17: 248-61.
- 28. Rhys HI, Dell'Accio F, Pitzalis C, Moore A, Norling LV, Perretti M. Neutrophil Microvesicles from  Healthy  Control  and  Rheumatoid  Arthritis  Patients Prevent the Inflammatory Activation of Macrophages. EBioMedicine. 2018; 29: 60-9.
- 29. Johnson BL, 3rd,  Midura EF, Prakash PS, Rice TC,  Kunz N,  Kalies K, et al. Neutrophil derived microparticles increase mortality and the counterinflammatory response in a murine model of sepsis. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2017; 1863: 2554-63.
- 30. Nauseef  WM,  Borregaard  N.  Neutrophils  at  work.  Nat  Immunol.  2014;  15: 602-11.
- 31. Thery C, Witwer KW, Aikawa E, Alcaraz MJ, Anderson JD, Andriantsitohaina R, et al. Minimal  information  for  studies  of  extracellular  vesicles  2018 (MISEV2018): a position statement of the International Society for Extracellular  Vesicles  and  update  of  the  MISEV2014  guidelines.  J  Extracell Vesicles. 2018; 7: 1535750.
- 32. Camussi G, Deregibus MC, Bruno S, Cantaluppi V, Biancone L. Exosomes/microvesicles as a mechanism  of cell-to-cell communication. Kidney Int. 2010; 78: 838-48.
- 33. Valadi H, Ekstrom K, Bossios A, Sjostrand M, Lee JJ, Lotvall JO. Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells. Nat Cell Biol. 2007; 9: 654-9.
- 34. van der Pol E, Boing AN, Harrison P, Sturk A, Nieuwland R. Classification, functions, and clinical relevance of extracellular vesicles. Pharmacol Rev. 2012; 64: 676-705.
- 35. Graff  JW,  Dickson  AM,  Clay  G,  McCaffrey  AP,  Wilson  ME.  Identifying functional  microRNAs  in  macrophages  with  polarized  phenotypes.  J  Biol Chem. 2012; 287: 21816-25.
- 36. O'Connell  RM,  Rao  DS,  Chaudhuri  AA,  Baltimore  D.  Physiological  and pathological roles for microRNAs in the immune system. Nat Rev Immunol. 2010; 10: 111-22.
- 37. Saha B, Momen-Heravi F, Kodys K, Szabo G. MicroRNA  Cargo of Extracellular Vesicles from Alcohol-exposed Monocytes Signals Naive Monocytes  to  Differentiate  into  M2  Macrophages.  J  Biol  Chem.  2016;  291: 149-59.
- 38. Park  SY,  Shrestha  S,  Youn  YJ,  Kim  JK,  Kim  SY,  Kim  HJ,  et  al.  Autophagy Primes  Neutrophils  for  Neutrophil  Extracellular  Trap  Formation  during Sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017; 196: 577-89.
- 39. Marcon R, Bento AF, Dutra RC, Bicca MA, Leite DF, Calixto JB. Maresin 1, a proresolving  lipid  mediator  derived  from  omega-3  polyunsaturated  fatty acids, exerts protective actions in murine models of colitis. J Immunol. 2013; 191: 4288-98.
- 40. Raeven  P,  Zipperle  J,  Drechsler  S.  Extracellular  Vesicles  as  Markers  and Mediators in Sepsis. Theranostics. 2018; 8: 3348-65.

- 41. van de Winkel JG, Capel PJ. Human IgG Fc receptor heterogeneity: molecular aspects and clinical implications. Immunol Today. 1993; 14: 215-21.
- 42. Seveau S, Eddy  RJ, Maxfield FR, Pierini LM.  Cytoskeleton-dependent membrane domain segregation during neutrophil polarization. Mol Biol Cell. 2001; 12: 3550-62.
- 43. Rossy J, Schlicht D, Engelhardt B, Niggli V. Flotillins interact with PSGL-1 in neutrophils and, upon stimulation, rapidly organize into membrane domains subsequently accumulating in the uropod. PLoS One. 2009; 4: e5403.
- 44. Derrick  T,  Ramadhani  AM,  Mtengai  K,  Massae  P,  Burton  MJ,  Holland  MJ. miRNAs that associate with conjunctival inflammation and ocular Chlamydia trachomatis infection do not predict progressive disease. Pathog Dis. 2017; 75.
- 45. Derrick  T,  Roberts  C,  Rajasekhar  M,  Burr  SE,  Joof  H,  Makalo  P,  et  al. Conjunctival MicroRNA expression in inflammatory trachomatous scarring. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013; 7: e2117.
- 46. Meng QL, Liu F, Yang XY, Liu XM, Zhang X, Zhang C, et al. Identification of latent tuberculosis infection-related microRNAs in human U937 macrophages expressing Mycobacterium tuberculosis Hsp16.3. BMC Microbiol. 2014; 14: 37.
- 47. Fabbri  M,  Paone  A,  Calore  F,  Galli  R,  Gaudio  E,  Santhanam  R,  et  al. MicroRNAs bind to Toll-like receptors to induce prometastatic inflammatory response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109: E2110-6.
- 48. Momen-Heravi  F,  Bala  S,  Kodys  K,  Szabo  G.  Exosomes  derived  from alcohol-treated  hepatocytes  horizontally  transfer  liver  specific  miRNA-122 and sensitize monocytes to LPS. Sci Rep. 2015; 5: 9991.
- 49. Fell LH, Seiler-Mussler S, Sellier AB, Rotter B, Winter P, Sester M, et al. Impact of individual intravenous iron preparations on the differentiation of monocytes towards macrophages and dendritic cells. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2016; 31: 1835-45.
- 50. Armstrong DA, Nymon AB, Ringelberg CS, Lesseur C, Hazlett HF, Howard L, et al. Pulmonary microRNA profiling: implications in upper lobe predominant lung disease. Clin Epigenetics. 2017; 9: 56.
- 51. Cobos  Jimenez  V,  Bradley  EJ,  Willemsen  AM,  van  Kampen  AH,  Baas  F, Kootstra NA. Next-generation sequencing of microRNAs uncovers expression signatures in polarized macrophages. Physiol Genomics. 2014; 46: 91-103.
- 52. Escate  R,  Padro  T,  Badimon  L.  LDL  accelerates  monocyte  to  macrophage differentiation:  Effects  on  adhesion  and  anoikis.  Atherosclerosis.  2016;  246: 177-86.
- 53. Harris TA, Yamakuchi M, Ferlito M, Mendell JT, Lowenstein CJ. MicroRNA-126  regulates  endothelial  expression  of  vascular  cell  adhesion molecule 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008; 105: 1516-21.
- 54. Lin  JB,  Moolani  HV,  Sene  A,  Sidhu  R,  Kell  P,  Lin  JB,  et  al.  Macrophage microRNA-150  promotes  pathological  angiogenesis  as  seen  in  age-related macular degeneration. JCI Insight. 2018; 3.
- 55. Manoharan P, Basford JE, Pilcher-Roberts R, Neumann J, Hui DY, Lingrel JB. Reduced  levels  of  microRNAs  miR-124a  and  miR-150  are  associated  with increased  proinflammatory  mediator  expression  in  Kruppel-like  factor  2 (KLF2)-deficient macrophages. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289: 31638-46.
- 56. Shantikumar S, Caporali A, Emanueli C. Role of microRNAs in diabetes and its cardiovascular complications. Cardiovasc Res. 2012; 93: 583-93.
- 57. Dalli  J,  Norling  LV,  Montero-Melendez  T,  Federici  Canova  D,  Lashin  H, Pavlov AM, et al. Microparticle alpha-2-macroglobulin enhances pro-resolving  responses  and  promotes  survival  in  sepsis.  EMBO  Mol  Med. 2014; 6: 27-42.
- 58. Amulic  B,  Cazalet  C,  Hayes  GL,  Metzler  KD,  Zychlinsky  A.  Neutrophil function: from mechanisms to disease. Annu Rev Immunol. 2012; 30: 459-89.
- 59. Nauseef WM. Neutrophils, from cradle to grave and beyond. Immunol Rev. 2016; 273: 5-10.
- 60. Jones  HR,  Robb  CT,  Perretti  M,  Rossi  AG.  The  role  of  neutrophils  in inflammation resolution. Semin Immunol. 2016; 28: 137-45.
- 61. van der Poll T, van de Veerdonk  FL, Scicluna BP, Netea MG.  The immunopathology  of  sepsis  and  potential  therapeutic  targets.  Nat  Rev Immunol. 2017; 17: 407-20.
- 62. Yang X, Yin Y, Yan X, Yu Z, Liu Y, Cao J. Flagellin attenuates experimental sepsis in a macrophage-dependent manner. Crit Care. 2019; 23: 106.
- 63. Carestia A, Mena HA, Olexen CM, Ortiz Wilczynski JM, Negrotto S, Errasti AE, et al. Platelets Promote Macrophage Polarization toward Proinflammatory Phenotype and Increase Survival of Septic Mice. Cell Rep. 2019; 28: 896-908 e5.
- 64. Genschmer KR, Russell DW, Lal C, Szul T, Bratcher PE, Noerager BD, et al. Activated  PMN  Exosomes:  Pathogenic  Entities  Causing  Matrix  Destruction and Disease in the Lung. Cell. 2019; 176: 113-26 e15.
- 65. Hong  CW,  Kim  TK,  Ham  HY,  Nam  JS,  Kim  YH,  Zheng  H,  et  al. Lysophosphatidylcholine increases neutrophil bactericidal activity by enhancement of azurophil granule-phagosome fusion via glycine.GlyR alpha 2/TRPM2/p38 MAPK signaling. J Immunol. 2010; 184: 4401-13.
- 66. Zhou J, Ghoroghi S, Benito-Martin A, Wu H, Unachukwu UJ, Einbond LS, et al.  Characterization  of  Induced  Pluripotent  Stem  Cell  Microvesicle  Genesis, Morphology and Pluripotent Content. Sci Rep. 2016; 6: 19743.
- 67. Repnik  U,  Knezevic  M,  Jeras  M.  Simple  and  cost-effective  isolation  of monocytes from buffy coats. J Immunol Methods. 2003; 278: 283-92.
- 68. Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat Methods. 2012; 9: 671-5.
- 69. Swamydas M, Lionakis MS. Isolation, purification and labeling of mouse bone marrow neutrophils for functional studies and adoptive transfer experiments. J Vis Exp. 2013: e50586.