<!-- image -->

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/285595986

## Proteomic Analysis of Neutrophil Priming by PAF

Article in Protein	and	Peptide	Letters	·	December	2015

Impact	Factor:	1.07	·	DOI:	10.2174/0929866523666151202210604

READS

16

## 8 authors , including:

<!-- image -->

Protein &amp; Peptide Letters, 2016, 23, 142-151

## Proteomic Analysis of Neutrophil Priming by PAF

Elaine N. Aquino 1** , Anne C.D. Neves 1** , Karina C. Santos , Carlos E. Uribe , Paulo E.N. Souza , 1 2 3 José R. Correa , Mariana S. Castro  and Wagner Fontes * 4 1 1

1 Laboratory of Biochemistry and Protein Chemistry, Biology Institute, University of Brasilia, Brazil; 2 Physiological Sciences Department, Biology Institute, University of Brasilia, Brazil;  Semiconductive 3 and Magnetic Nanostructures Group, Applied Physics Nucleus, Physics Institute, University of Brasilia, Brazil;  Microscopy Laboratory, Biology Institute, University of Brasilia, Brazil 4

Abstract: Polymorphonuclear  neutrophils  are  the  main  cells  of  the  innate  immunity  inflammatory response.  Several  factors  can  activate  or  stimulate  neutrophils,  including  platelet-activating  factor (PAF),  a  lipid  mediator.  Some  authors  consider  the  activation  induced  by  PAF  priming  because  it triggers limited production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and it amplifies the response of the cell to a subsequent  activator.  The  stimulation  is  reversible,  which  is critical for modulating  the

W. Fontes

<!-- image -->

inflammatory  response.  Exacerbated  inflammatory  responses  lead  to  serious  diseases,  such  as  systemic  inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), among others. Characterizing the stimulation of neutrophils during the possible reversion or prevention of an exaggerated inflammatory response is critical for the development of control strategies. In this study, a proteomic approach was used to identify 36 proteins that differ  in abundance between quiescent neutrophils and PAFstimulated neutrophils. The identified proteins were associated with increased DNA repair processes, calcium flux, protein transcription,  cytoskeleton  alterations  that  facilitate  migration  and  degranulation,  and  the  release  of  proinflammatory cytokines and proteins that modulate the inflammatory response. Some of the identified proteins have not been previously reported in neutrophils.

Keywords: Inflammation,  mass  spectrometry,  neutrophils,  platelet-activating  factor,  proteomics,  systemic  inflammatory  response.

## 1. INTRODUCTION

Inflammation  is  a  complex  mechanism  of  fundamental importance for defense  against  invading  organisms  and  tissue damage. Thus, an understanding of the cells and mediators  that  modulate  inflammatory  mechanisms  is  critical  for the  development  of  diagnostic  and  therapeutic  tools  [1,2]. Although inflammation is usually associated with defense or healing processes, it is also a major cause of tissue damage and is associated with high morbidity and mortality rates in many  conditions.  Several  studies  have  indicated  a  positive correlation between the severity of injury and the inflammatory response, such as after severe trauma, when the onset of systemic  inflammatory  response  syndrome  (SIRS)  is  observed, along with stimulation of circulating neutrophils [3]. Acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome  (ARDS)  is  also  observed after severe trauma or in septic patients and is characterized by increased microvascular permeability in the lungs, alveolar  edema,  and  an  intense  inflammatory  process  with neutrophilic infiltrates [4,5].

Platelet activating factor (PAF) is a relevant mediator of neutrophil function when the inflammatory response escapes the affected  region.  Elevated levels of PAF  have  been

detected in both the bloodstream and alveolar lavage in individuals with ARDS due to sepsis and trauma [6,7]. In trauma patients,  PAF-stimulated  neutrophils  are  observed  in  nonaffected  tissues,  indicating  that  these  cells  participate  in pathological  processes,  such  as  ARDS.  In  this  respect,  the potential modulation  of neutrophil activity represents a therapeutic strategy [8] to minimize injuries caused by these inflammatory processes. A better understanding of the neutrophil  activation process could lead  to the  identification of markers to permit early diagnosis of these pathologies [7,9].

Neutrophils display 3 phenotypic states (quiescent, primed, and activated). These states can be monitored by the amount of released ROS generated by the NADPH oxidase complex  during  respiratory  burst  and  are  important  for  the destruction and killing of pathogens [10]. The transition between  these  states  is  dynamic  and  occurs  in  a  continuum [11];  the  transition  to  the  activated  state  can  be  triggered either  by  a  single  stimulus  or  by  a  sequence  of  events  in which  the  first  hit  leads  to  a  primed  state  and  the  second fully  activates  the  cell  [9,11,12].  These  priming  agents  include  PAF  [11].  The  PAF signals  to  G-protein  coupled  receptors on neutrophils and triggers the activation of enzymes such as PLA2, PLC /g1 , ERK1/2 and p38MAPK (Supplementary  Fig. 4 ).  PAF  is  a  proinflammatory  lipid  mediator  [13] produced by neutrophils, platelets,  macrophages,  basophils, and endothelial cells that has potent direct effects on neutrophils  and  can  induce  chemotaxis,  actin  polymerization,  ag-

gregation,  degranulation,  translocation  of  NADPH  Oxidase components  for  assembly  and  increased  transcription  [7,9, 11,14].  Several  aspects  of  this  stimulation  pathway  remain unknown,  such  as  the  mechanisms  by  which  it  is  reversed [15]  and  those  that  lead  to  priming-type  actions,  such  as  a low level of ROS production.

Recent  studies  have  focused  on  proteomic  analysis  of cellular  fractions  of  neutrophils,  such  as  the  cytoskeleton, plasma membrane, and granules [16-19], to compare different  activation  agents.  However,  there  are  no  data  on  the whole cell proteome of neutrophils stimulated by PAF. The focus of this work is to characterize the stimulation of neutrophils  by  PAF  using  a  classical  proteomic  approach  to identify  differentially  abundant  proteins  between  quiescent neutrophils and those stimulated by PAF. The results of this study  will improve  our  understanding  of  the  neutrophil stimulation process.

## 2. MATERIALS AND METHODS

## 2.1. Experimental Design

The  experimental  design  was  established  after  a  power analysis, which was performed from a preliminary assay as described by Cairns et al. [20]. This analysis established that biological  (cv  =  0.91)  and  experimental  (cv  =  0.08)  triplicates were sufficient to reveal spots with at least 4-fold differences  in  volume  for  /g2=0.05  and  a  power  of  0.8,  which, according  to  Valledor et  al. [21],  can  be  considered  to  be optimal values for proteomics assays.

## 2.2. Cell Isolation

Human  neutrophils  (10   cells)  were  obtained  from  3 7 healthy donors who were not using any medication. Donors signed the informed consent approved by the ethical committee. Diluted heparin (5 IU/mL) was used as an anticoagulant to  avoid  the  interference  with  neutrophil  stimulation  anticipated  by  the  use  of  other  anticoagulants  or  higher  heparin concentrations [22].

Neutrophils  were  isolated  using  plasma-Percoll  density gradients  (60%  and  70%).  After  centrifugation,  the  neutrophils were resuspended as described below. An aliquot was taken for cell counting, viability, and purity analysis by light microscopy.

## 2.3. In Vitro Stimulation and Flow Cytometry Analysis

Isolated neutrophils were divided in 2 aliquots of 4 /g1 10 6 cells for electrophoresis and 8 aliquots of 2.5 x 10  cells for 5 flow  cytometry.  Of  these,  4  aliquots  were  resuspended  in HBSS without and 4 in HBSS with 0.14 g/L CaCl2 and 0.098 g/L  MgSO4 and incubated with the respective  activator:  20 nmol/L  PAF  (Sigma  P1402),  100  nmol/L  fMLP  (Sigma F3506),  20  nmol/L  PAF  plus  100  nmol/L  fMLP,  or  100 nmol/L  PMA  (Sigma  P1585)  for  30  minutes  at  room  temperature.  One  aliquot  was  incubated  only  in  HBSS  for  the same period as a control [9]. Flow cytometry was performed (FACScalibur, BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany), and 10,000 total events were analyzed with the argon laser operating at 488 nm. Forward scatter and side  scatter data were collected  on  a  linear  scale.  Yellow  fluorescence  (FL2)  and

green  fluorescence  (FL1)  were  collected  on  logarithmic scales. The cell purity was assessed by cell size and internal complexity. To estimate viability after stimulation, the neutrophils were incubated with 1 /g1L/mL propidium iodide, and ROS production was quantified by adding 15 /g1M dihydrorhodamine-123  1  minute  after  the  addition  of  PAF,  fMLP, PAF  plus  fMLP,  or  PMA,  followed  by  incubation  for  30 minutes prior to flow cytometry analysis [23].

## 2.4. Cell Lysis

Samples with at least 97% purity and 98% viability and in  which  100%  of  the  cells  displayed  an  increase  in  H2O2 production  were  centrifuged  and  subjected  to  cell  lysis  in protein solubilization buffer (7 mol/L urea, 2 mol/L thiourea, Pharmalyte pH 4-7 0.5%, Triton X-100 1%, protease inhibitors 1%, and nucleases mix 1%). After 1 hour of incubation, 0.1 mg//g72L  DTT  and 0.16 mol/L EDTA were added and incubated  for  another  hour.  The  protein  concentration  of  the neutrophil protein extracts was quantified using the Bradford assay [24] as adapted by Ramagli [25], and the extracts were stored at -80°C until electrophoretic separation.

## 2.5. Two-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis

Neutrophil protein extracts were diluted in the previously described lysis buffer to a final protein concentration of 0.14 /g1g//g1L.  Aliquots  of  350  /g1L  were  applied  to  18-cm  IPG  gel strips with a linear pH range of 4 to 7 (Immobiline DryStrip, GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). The strips were submitted to  isoelectric  focusing  (IEF)  in  an  IPG-Phor  II  instrument (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) with the following steps: first,  increasing  gradient  up  to  500V  for  500  Vh,  second, increasing  gradient  up  to  3500V  for  3500Vh  and  a  final steady gradient of 8000V for 40000Vh, at 20°C and constant current of 75/g1A per strip.

After focusing, the IPG strips were immersed in 5 mL of reduction solution  containing 324 /g1mol/L DTT for 15 min, followed  by  alkylation  with  135  /g1mol/L  iodoacetamide  in the dark for 15 min at room temperature. Then SDS-PAGE was  performed  on  12%  polyacrylamide  gels  at  a  constant current  of  20  mA  per  gel  and  at  19°C  [26].  Proteins  were visualized by silver staining in alkaline solution, which was adapted  for  higher  sensitivity  and  mass  spectrometry  compatibility as previously described [16].

## 2.6. Image and Statistical Analyses

The images of 18 silver-stained gels (technical  and biological  triplicates  for  each  condition)  were  analyzed  using Image  Master 2D Platinum (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) [27]. Spot detection and matching were manually verified for each spot and double-checked for the spots that were differentially abundant.

Paired spots were tested for normality of volumes using the  Shapiro-Wilk  test  .  The  significance  of  the  differential abundance  was  assessed  using  the  paired-sample  t-test  (for parametric samples) and the Wilcoxon test (for nonparametric samples). In addition to the statistical tests, 2 additional stringency criteria were applied: a differential abundance  ratio  of  at  least  4-fold  (as  determined  by  the  power analysis)  and  the  presence  of  the  spot  in  at  least  8  gels  of

each condition. Spots presenting missing values beyond this condition  were  discarded.  Because  total  protein  quantification was performed prior to the electrophoresis and the same amount of protein was applied to all gels, normalization was performed  by  individual  spot  quantities  with  respect  to  the total  spot  volume per gel. Data were subject  to  logarithmic transformation.  We  considered  spots  unique  (exclusive  to one condition) if  they were detected  in at  least 8 gels for  a particular condition but were not detected in any of the 9 gels for the other condition, as suggested in [28].

## 2.7. Tryptic Digestion

Selected spots were excised for digestion and MS identification  as  described  in  [16].  Briefly,  digestion  was  performed with 0.2 /g1g//g1L trypsin in bicarbonate buffer 25 mM and CaCl2 5 mM for 15 hours, at 37°C [29]. After extracting the peptides from the gel matrix, the sample was lyophilized and  resuspended  in  20  /g1L  0.1%  TFA  and  concentrated through Poros R2 microcolumns (Applied Biosystems,  CA, USA) [30]. The samples were eluted in 2 /g1L of a 1:1 matrix mix  solution  (5  /g1g//g1L /g1 -cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic  acid  in 90%  ACN,  5%  formic  acid,  and  5  /g1g//g1L  2,5-dihydroxybenzoic  acid in  90%  ACN,  0.1%  TFA)  and  applied  to  an AnchorChip  plate  for  MALDI-TOF-TOF  analysis  [31,32]. In-gel digested peptides were alternatively analyzed by LCMS-MS, as described below.

## 2.8. Mass Spectrometry

The  peptides  eluted on  the plate were  analyzed  by MALDI-TOF-TOF mass spectrometers (Autoflex II, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany and AB 4700 Applied Biosystems,  California,  USA)  in  positive  and  reflector  mode  (ion source 1: 20 kV) with a mass range from 800 to 3500 (m/z). The  mass  spectrometers  were  externally  calibrated  using  a standard  mixture  of  peptides  (starter  Kit  -  Peptide  Calibration  Standard  for  Maldi-TOF  MS,  Bruker  Daltonics,  Bremen,  Germany),  and  the  spectra  were  internally  calibrated with peptides from the digestion of keratin contaminants and trypsin autolysis.

Peptides from spots that produced no reliable identification  by  MALDI  were  analyzed  by  LC-MS,  which  couples reversed-phase liquid chromatography to mass spectrometry in  an  LTQ  Orbitrap  XL  (Thermo  Scientific,  Bremen,  Germany), producing doubly charged peaks in abundance. The analysis was performed as follows: peptides were redissolved  in  10 /g1 L 0.5% formic acid, 4 /g77L  of  which  were applied  in  the  trap  column  (150  /g77m  inner  diameter,  2  cm long)  packed  in-house  with  C18  material  (3/g77m  size,  100Å pore,  ReproSil-Pur  C18AQ,  Dr.  Maisch  GmbH,  Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Loaded peptides were separated on an analytical column (75 /g77m inner diameter, 15 cm long) packed with the same material. A linear solvent gradient was composed by mixing solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) with solvent B (80% [v/v] ACN, 0.1% [v/v] formic acid) and controlled by an Ultra-nano LC system (Ekseigen, Redwood, California,  USA).  The  samples  were  loaded  onto  the  trap column at 5 /g1 L/min and desalted in 0.1% formic acid for 5 min. After that the flow rate was changed to 200 nL/min and directed through the analytical column, using gradient of: 2-

60% solvent-B for 50 min, ramp up to 100% solvent-B for 5 min and kept at this concentration for 5 min.

Peptides  eluted  from  the  analytical  column  directly  into an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. The MS/MS spectra were acquired using a Data Dependent Acquisition cycle that consisted of a survey scan encompassing the m/z range 300-1600  with  a  resolution  of  60,000  FWHM  and  a  target value  of  1  x  10   ions.  The  survey  scan  was  followed  by 6 MS/MS  fragmentation  of  the  10  most  abundant  precursor ions with multiple charges. The spectra were acquired with a collision energy of 35% and a target value equal to 1 x 10 4 ions in the linear  ion trap. Previously fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 90 s.

## 2.9. Database Search

Peptide  lists  from  Peptide  Mass  Fingerprint  PMF  and Peptide  Fragment  Fingerprint  PFF  [33]  experiments  were submitted to database searches using Mascot software (www.matrixscience.com).  The  search  parameters  were  the following:  NCBInr  database  version  20091202,  taxonomy Homo sapiens ,  carbamidomethylation  of  cysteines  as  fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification; maximum of 1 missed cleavage; mass tolerance for a precursor mass of 127 ppm for MALDI spectra and 10 ppm for Orbitrap spectra;  and a fragment ions  mass tolerance of 0.6 Da [34]. To further validate the Mascot results, the peptide  mass  error  distribution,  coherence  between  theoretical and experimental mass and pI values, and peptides containing missing cleavages and Met oxidation were all manually verified.  The  Orbitrap  results  were  validated  based  on  peptide ion scores. The score thresholds were 60 for identifications based on  a single peptide, 30 for up to 2 unique peptides,  and 20 for up to 3 unique peptides. The spectra from the  Orbitrap  that  were  not  identified  or  had  dubious  results were  processed  by  filtering  common  background  spectra with  EagleEye  software  [35].  After  filtering,  automatic de novo sequencing  was  performed  by  PepNovo  [36]  and  further submitted to MS BLAST for an error-tolerant search as described in [37].

## 2.10. Protein Function Prediction

The  identified  proteins  were  classified  according  to  the gene  ontology  (GO)  terms  for  protein  annotations.  In  this study, annotations were applied using the extended similarity group (ESG) software [38], which evaluates prediction reliability based on the sequence of the protein, GO term, protein domains, and its neighborhood. A cutoff value of 0.35, which indicated the  number of PSI-BLAST hits  to be considered  at  each  level of ESG, and 2 levels of neighborhood around the query protein were used as search parameters [39, 40]. The  cellular compartment,  function, and  biological process were selected only when their associated confidence was greater than 20%.

## 2.11. Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM)

To investigate the presence of TRIO and F-actin binding proteins  neutrophils  were  incubated  with  anti-TRIOBP  that recognizes a stretch of sequence that matches one of the peptides sequenced  by  mass  spectrometry  ' RNWIEALRKTV

RPTSAPDVTKLSDSNKENALHSYSTQKGPLK '. After stimulation (or incubation with buffer) the cells were washed and fixed  with  3.7%  formaldehyde  in  PBS  for  10  min  at  room temperature.  The  cells  were  washed  again  and  nonspecific bindings were blocked with 1% BSA for 20 min. The cells were then incubated with 1 /g1g/mL anti-TRIOBP (produced in rabbit, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), overnight at 4°C [41]. The first incubation was followed by washing the cells and incubating with Anti-Rabbit IgG-FITC (Sigma-Aldrich, St.  Louis,  USA)  for  1  h  at  37°C.  For  nuclear  staining,  the samples were further incubated with 3 /g1M 4,6-diamidino-2phenylindole,  dihydrochoride  (DAPI;  Invitrogen,  Paisley, UK) for 5 min at room temperature. The cells were adhered to  the  glass  slide  by  a  cytospin  (Centrifugal Hettlch  Zentrifugen - Rotoflx 32A, Tuttlingen, German). Stained samples were examined using an inverted confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP5 Microsystems, Postfach, Germany) using an argon laser.  Filters  were  set  to  430-470  nm  to  detect  DAPI  using 405nm UV line, and to 500-540 nm to detect FITC using 488 nm line. The objective used was a 40x1.25 oil UV, and the z resolution was 334 with a zoom factor of 8. The image size used was 246.03 x 246.03 /g1m and the pixel size was 481.47 x 481.47 nm [42].

## 3. RESULTS

## 3.1. Neutrophil Priming by PAF

Concentrations of 20 nmol/L PAF and 100 nmol/L fMLP and PMA were selected based on a literature review [9, 43, 44]. This concentration for PAF is a reversible stimulus for NADPH  oxidase  and  an  effective  first  hit  for  subsequent activation by fMLP, thus characterizing the action of PAF as priming. The fMLP and PMA concentrations are defined as irreversible  activators.  Cell  size  and  granule  quantity  were larger  when  the  cells  were  incubated  with  Ca 2+ and  Mg 2+ (data not  shown). Our results  indicated  an  increase  in fluo-

rescence intensity and the number of ROS-producing cells in the presence of all activators when incubated with  Ca 2+ and Mg 2+ compared to  stimulation  in the  absence of  these  ions, with the exception of the percentage of cells for PMA. The fold change in the fluorescence intensity and the number of cells with increased fluorescence were 2.8-fold and 71% for PAF,  13.8-fold  and  73%  for  fMLP,  34.6-fold  and  24%  for PAF plus fMLP, and 3.8-fold and no percentage change for PMA as shown in Fig. 1 .

## 3.2. Two-Dimensional Gel Analysis

Two-dimensional  electrophoretic  maps  were  produced from 50 /g1g of total protein neutrophil extracts. Typical maps from quiescent and PAF-primed cells are shown in Fig. 2 .

On average, 1500 spots were detected on each gel. After comparing  the  gels  and  performing  statistical  analysis  in compliance with the stringency criteria described above, 51 spots displayed different volumes between the conditions, 16 spots  were  unique  to  quiescent  neutrophils,  and  23  spots were  unique  to  neutrophils  stimulated  with  PAF,  while  10 and  2  spots  were  upregulated  and  downregulated,  respectively, after stimulation of neutrophils with PAF.

## 3.3. MS, MS/MS, and Protein Identification

Among the spots that differed significantly between the 2 conditions,  we  identified  36  proteins,  of  which  13  were unique to quiescent cells and 16 were unique to PAF stimulation and 6 were upregulated and 1 was downregulated after stimulation  (Supplementary  Table 1 ).  A  total  of  17  of  the identified proteins had not been previously reported  in neutrophils or  associated with stimulation by PAF.  These findings enhance the identification coverage of 2 previous publications  by  our  group  [16,45],  in  which  36  other  proteins were identified in the 2D map of quiescent neutrophils.

Figure 1 . Cytometric analysis of neutrophils comparing H2O2 production after stimulation and activation in the absence (upper row) and presence (lower row) of Ca 2+ and Mg 2+ . Cell size (FSC) versus DHR fluorescence (FL1). The columns represent the different stimulation methods used in both the presence and the absence of the cations.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 . Two-dimensional gel images from both conditions, highlighting the differentially abundant (circled spots) and the identified proteins (numbers that correlate to supplementary table 1 ). Fifty micrograms of protein were focused in a pH range of 4-7 and submitted to reduction and alkylation, followed by SDS-PAGE in 12% gels under a constant current of 20 mA. ( A ) Gel of quiescent neutrophils. ( B ) Gel of neutrophils stimulated with PAF. Spots circled in white were detected uniquely in the condition where they are highlighted; spots circled in black and white are upregulated in the condition where they are highlighted. The top inserts represent a zoomed region of four representative spots, showing also a 3D representation where the peak height is proportional to the spot intensity. The histograms on top shows the normalized volume profile of the spots across all gels. Conditions 'a' to 'i' represent spots from quiescent cells and conditions 'j' to 'r' represent spots from PAF stimulated cells.

<!-- image -->

## 3.4. Protein Function Prediction

Each  identified  protein  was  evaluated  and  grouped  according to the predicted cellular component, molecular function, and biological process.

Our results demonstrated that most of the identified proteins  are  in  the  cytoplasm,  nucleus,  or  membrane,  with  a discrete  enrichment  of  cytoplasmic  and  nuclear  proteins  in the stimulated state (Supplementary Fig. 1 ).  Similar  enrichment  was  also  observed  for  proteins  that  bind  to  nucleotides/nucleic acids and for proteins with hydrolase or transferase activity. Proteins that bind to proteins or to metals and proteins  that have  transferase activity were  enriched in quiescent  neutrophils  (Supplementary  Fig. 2 ). There  was  no enrichment of any specific biological processes in quiescent neutrophils; the identified proteins were involved in the cell cycle, protein synthesis, transport, and the immune response. Stimulated neutrophils produced proteins involved in proteolysis,  transcription,  translation,  and  transport,  suggesting increased protein synthesis. Proteins linked  to phosphorylation processes were identified in both conditions (Fig. 3 ).

## 3.5. Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM)

The test using the confocal microscopy made it possible to confirm the presence of TRIOBP in quiescent neutrophils

and  undetectable  in  stimulated  neutrophils  (supplementary figure 3 ).  The  fact  that  one  of  the  domains  detected  by  the antibody  was  partly  sequenced  by  mass  spectrometry  enhanced the reliability of  the test, being  the protein detected only in the absence of stimulation. No specific intracellular localization could be determined for TRIOBP.

## 4. DISCUSSION

PAF is a proinflammatory lipid mediator that stimulates neutrophils,  inducing  chemotaxis,  actin  polymerization,  aggregation,  ROS  production,  and  many  priming-type  actions [7,9,11]. These actions require changes in the quantity, structure, and shape of proteins, as corroborated by the results of this  study,  which  evaluated  the  relative  abundance  of  proteins  after  stimulation.  Of  the  51  spots  with  different  volumes,  16  were  unique  to  quiescent  neutrophils,  23  were unique  to  neutrophils  stimulated  with  PAF,  and  10  were upregulated  and  2  were  downregulated  after  stimulation. Among these,  we  identified  36  proteins,  of  which  13  were unique to quiescent cells, 16 were unique to PAF-stimulated neutrophils, 6 were upregulated, and 1 was downregulated in stimulated  neutrophils.  Three  spots  contained  mixtures  of proteins. Proteins identified under both conditions were enriched  for  cytoplasmic  and  nuclear  components  as  well  as motility-related cellular components.  These proteins partici-

pate  in  enzyme  processes  and  bind  to  nucleotides/nucleic acids  and  ions.  In  the  following  paragraphs,  we  highlight some  of  the  regulated  functions  supported  by  our  current findings.  The  supplementary  material  includes  a  more  detailed discussion of other functions that encompass a smaller number of proteins.

## Regulation of Calcium Flux

This  study  highlights  the  importance  of  calcium  influx for  the  intracellular  production  of  ROS  in  neutrophils,  as indicated by the differences between stimuli shown in Fig. 1 . A PAF concentration of 20 nmol/L was sufficient to stimulate neutrophil priming, as assessed by the action of NADPH oxidase,  and  a  higher  stimulation  level  was  obtained  in  the presence of extracellular calcium and magnesium. Based on

A

<!-- image -->

| K0564\_HUMAN SYCP1\_HUMAN Q2HXV4\_HUMAN RB12B\_HUMAN   | PTHB1\_HUMAN LONP2\_HUMAN CSDE1\_HUMAN SEPT4\_HUMAN B3KRK8\_HUMAN STRAA\_HUMAN                         | TEKT2\_HUMAN PYGL\_HUMAN DDAH1\_HUMAN NCKAP1\_HUMAN             | TRFL\_HUMAN                                                                                                 | NCKPL\_HUMAN TF3C4\_HUMAN K1C28\_HUMAN Q4LE79\_HUMAN        | PLM/g3protein YSK4\_HUMAN DESM\_HUMAN   | ANXA2\_HUMAN CATA\_HUMAN interferon/g3C/g3term/g3modified Q5W0K5\_HUMAN   | Q96KJ8\_HUMAN Q9Y656\_HUMAN   |
|----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| MMP9\_HUMAN 51 41                                   | GELS\_HUMAN A5Z217\_HUMAN PRS4\_HUMAN B4DMF1\_HUMAN biological/g3process/g3terms protein/g3folding 5 |                                                             | protein/g3metabolic/g3process                                                                              |                                                         | 8                                     | A6PVM6\_HUMAN B1AHE1\_HUMAN HP2\_HUMAN                                    | NDKA\_HUMAN                  |
| 41 37                                              |                                                                                                  | protein/g3transport DNA/g3repair                            |                                                                                                            |                                                         |                                       | 8                                                                      |                             |
| 6 5                                                | defense/g3response 8 8 99 protein/g3amino/g3acid/g3phosphorylation                               |                                                             |                                                                                                            |                                                         |                                       | 100 24 59                                                              |                             |
| 34 34                                              | 79 27 76 83 10 76                                                                                | transcription                                               | regul./g3of/g3tra ns cri p./g3DNA/g882dependent                                                            | 16                                                      |                                       | 99 11 11                                                               |                             |
| 39 30                                              | 16 100 22                                                                                        | cell/g3cycl e                                               | ubiquitin/g3cycle                                                                                          |                                                         |                                       | 24 11 20 8                                                             | 5                           |
| 96 5                                               | 77                                                                                               |                                                             | metabolic/g3process microtub./g3cytoskel./g3organiz./g3biogen.                                             | 14                                                      |                                       | 74                                                                     |                             |
| 5 100                                              | 12 24 16 100 5 17                                                                                | translation                                                 | proteolysis potassium/g3ion/g3transport                                                                    | 34                                                      | 25                                    | 100 7 13                                                               |                             |
| 64 5 30                                            | cytoskeleton/g3organiz./g3and/g3biogenesis 25 13 9 14                                            | collagen/g3catabolic/g3process                              | cytoskeleton/g3organiz./g3and/g3biogenesis mRNA/g3processing                                               | 9 35                                                    | 9 11                                  | 92 10                                                                  |                             |
| 21 5                                               | 5 58 6 100                                                                                       | transport                                                   | RNA/g3splicing                                                                                             |                                                         |                                       |                                                                        |                             |
|                                                    | 6 99                                                                                             |                                                             | carbohydrate/g3metabolic/g3process                                                                         |                                                         | 15                                    |                                                                        |                             |
|                                                    | 75                                                                                               |                                                             | ATP/g882dependent/g3proteolysis i ntracellular/g3signaling/g3cascade                                       |                                                         | 8                                     | 14                                                                     | 5                           |
|                                                    | 100                                                                                              | glycogen/g3metabolic/g3process                              | protein/g3catabolic/g3process calcium/g3ion/g3transport                                                    |                                                         | 9 7 91                                | 43                                                                     |                             |
|                                                    |                                                                                                  |                                                             | response/g3to/g3oxidative/g3stress                                                                         |                                                         |                                       | 100 98 94 97 33 43 43                                                  |                             |
|                                                    | 87                                                                                               |                                                             | electron/g3transport i mmune/g3response i nterferon/g882gamma/g3biosynth./g3process                        |                                                         |                                       |                                                                        | 34 34 26                    |
|                                                    | 91                                                                                               |                                                             | hydrogen/g3peroxide/g3catabolic/g3process                                                                  |                                                         |                                       |                                                                        |                             |
| 17                                                 | 95                                                                                               | positive/g3reg./g3of/g3a cti vated/g3T/g3cel l /g3prol i fe | barbed/g882end/g3actin/g3filam./g3capping arginine/g3catabolic/g3process i ron/g3i on/g3tra ns port        |                                                         |                                       |                                                                        |                             |
|                                                    |                                                                                                  |                                                             | regulation/g3of/g3cell/g3adhesion                                                                          |                                                         |                                       |                                                                        |                             |
|                                                    |                                                                                                  |                                                             | T/g882he l per/g31/g3type/g3i mmune/g3res pons e GTP/g3biosynthetic/g3process UTP/g3biosynthetic/g3process | i nduct./g3of/g3a popt./g3vi a /g3dea th/g3dom./g3recep |                                       |                                                                        | 99 99                       |
|                                                    |                                                                                                  |                                                             | CTP/g3biosynthetic/g3process                                                                               |                                                         |                                       | 99 99 33 33 100                                                        |                             |
|                                                    |                                                                                                  |                                                             | nucleotide/g3metabolic/g3process complement/g3activ./g3classical/g3pathway                                 |                                                         |                                       |                                                                        |                             |
|                                                    |                                                                                                  |                                                             | i nnate/g3immune/g3response l i popolyssaccharide/g3biosynth./g3proces                                     |                                                         |                                       | 32                                                                     |                             |
|                                                    |                                                                                                  |                                                             |                                                                                                            | 36                                                      |                                       |                                                                        |                             |
| 21                                                 |                                                                                                  |                                                             | response/g3to/g3vírus cell/g3a dhesion                                                                     |                                                         | 36                                    |                                                                        |                             |
|                                                    |                                                                                                  |                                                             | i nterm./g3fi l a m./g3cytos kel ./g3orga ni z./g3bi oge                                                   |                                                         |                                       |                                                                        |                             |

our results, extracellular calcium influences the activation of neutrophils in the presence of various stimuli. Many proteins are  calcium-dependent  and  participate  in  the  activation  of NADPH  oxidase,  adhesion  to  the  endothelium,  degranulation,  activation of phospholipase A2, and synthesis of IL-8. Chemoattractants and molecules such as LTB4, C5a, fMLP, and PAF (the receptors for which are membrane-coupled G proteins in neutrophils) are able to trigger the influx of calcium. The G protein activates PLC, which enables the formation of IP3, which initiates mobilization via  modification of the calcium channel on the plasma membrane and the release of calcium from storage vesicles into the cytosol [46]. Many proteins identified in this study bind to calcium ions, including  MMP9,  DSP,  GELS,  ANXA2,  HP2,  and  CACNB2, while  others  bind  magnesium  ions,  such  as  YSK4  and NDKA.

Figure 3 . ( A ) Distribution of the biological process GO terms for the differentially abundant spots. The heatmap ( ) illustrates the percentage of certainty attributed by the ESG software. The chart in the center correlates spot abundance with the ESG score; the red bars to the right indicate processes enriched in quiescent cells, and the blue bars to the left indicate processes enriched in PAF-stimulated neutrophils. ( B ) Overall distribution of the biological process GO terms for all differentially abundant spots. (The color version of the figure is available in the electronic copy of the article).

<!-- image -->

Among  the  proteins  described, CACNB2  is  directly linked  to  the  operation  of  calcium  channels.  The  CACNB2 /g1 2-subunit is present in the calcium channel and is responsible  for  its  regulation  (Supplementary  Fig. 4 )  [47].  Another study  reported  that  IP3  receptors  are  in  close  proximity  to calcium channels, and the opening of this receptor causes  a conformational change, thus enabling Ca 2+ influx [46]. This subunit was not detected in stimulated neutrophils, in accordance with a study by Teles et  al .  reporting the  absence of this protein in activated neutrophils in trauma patients [45].

Three  other  identified  proteins,  although  not  binding  to calcium ions, are involved in the mobilization process. Parathyroid  hormone-responsive  B1  (PTHB1)  (Supplementary Fig. 4 ) and the unnamed protein B4DMF were identified as unique to  stimulated  neutrophils,  and  WSB-1  was  only  detected in quiescent neutrophils. The first 2 are known to be downregulated by parathyroid hormone (PTH) in osteoblastic cells, and WSB-1 increases the expression of parathyroid hormone-related peptides in brain cells [48]. Because PTH is associated with Ca 2+ transport in different cell types, these 3 proteins  are  likely  involved  in  calcium  capture  by  neutrophils, in  agreement  with  their  regulation  by  stimulation, which could be due either to hormonal influence or to a similar  mechanism  in  neutrophils.  Evidence  supporting  this  hypothesis was provided by Silva et al. , who observed upregulation of PTHB1 in activated neutrophils of septic patients.

## Oxidative Stress

The progressive increase in the amount of ROS released by neutrophils detected in this study (PAF &lt; fMLP &lt; PAF + fMLP &lt; PMA) is in agreement with observations by Botha

[9].  Some  of  the  identified  proteins  can  participate  in  this regulatory mechanism, such as CATA, DDAH1, NM23, and HP.

The enzyme catalase (CATA) is abundant in peroxisomes (Supplementary Fig. 4 ),  which break down H2O2 into water and oxygen, thereby reducing the amount of ROS and influencing lipid oxidation mechanisms [49]. In this study, CATA was found only  in  quiescent  neutrophils  and  was  undetectable  at  the  same gel position in stimulated neutrophils, perhaps  due  to  a  different  pI  due  to  phosphorylation  at  1  or more  phosphorylation  sites,  which  may  be  required  for  its activity [50].

DDAH1 hydrolyzes peptide bonds at methylated arginine residues,  releasing  methylarginine  groups  to  the  cytoplasm. The  accumulation  of  such  groups  inhibits  the  activation  of nitric  oxide  synthetase  and,  accordingly,  the  generation  of nitric  oxide  (NO)  [51,52].  This  protein  is  inhibited  by  oxidized lipids [51] and was detected only in stimulated neutrophils.  This  finding,  in  conjunction  with  the  regulation  of CATA, suggests that these proteins might be involved in the balance of ROS/RNS in neutrophils.

The  NM23  protein,  nucleoside  diphosphate  kinase  A (NDKA), is found in the cytosol of quiescent monocytes and participates in cell shape alteration, proliferation, differentiation,  adhesion,  DNA  repair,  migration,  endocytosis,  transcription, and apoptosis. It interacts with Rac, Cdc42, Rad, /g1 and /g2 -tubulin,  and  vimentin  [53,  54].  The  upregulation  of NM23-H1 is associated  with  low  levels  of  ROS  via  an  increase  in  GPX1,  an  antioxidant  enzyme  with  strong  resistance  to  oxidative  stress,  and  was  related  to  an  increase  in p53,  which  forms  a  complex  with  NM23.  The  protein  is

transferred to the extracellular environment, where it induces apoptosis  in  activated  monocytes  and  regulates  epidermal homeostasis and keratinocyte proliferation, leading to tissue repair  [55,56].  NM23  was  found  only  in  quiescent  neutrophils,  suggesting  that  this  protein  is  released  into  the  extracellular environment, where it can modulate inflammatory responses,  and  that  its  removal  from  the  cytosol  decreases protection against ROS.

## Protein Synthesis, Turnover, and Modification

We  observed  events  suggesting  that  PAF  stimulation might  be  associated  to  increased  protein  modification  and synthesis,  in  agreement  with  previous  reports  [57],  such  as the identification of proteins associated with the activation of the  proteasome  and  transcription  and  translation,  including PRS4, TF3C4, RB12B, CSDE1, SYCP1, and RIO1.

Proteases such as LONP2 (Supplementary Fig. 4 ), which is believed to be responsible for the degradation of misfolded proteins  [58],  and  subunit  4  of  the  proteasome  26S  (PRS4) were  observed  only  in  stimulated  neutrophils.  This  PRS subunit has ATPase activity and is essential for activation of the proteasome  [59].  The  26S  proteasome  mediates  the cleavage of precursors to form NF/g1 B, a dimer that is likely inactive in quiescent cells.

Synaptonemal complexes play a role in the regulation of transcription. SYCP1 (Supplementary Fig. 4 ) acts as a phosphatase  that  dephosphorylates  the  serine  residues  of  RNA polymerase II, an  important step  in the turnover of  this enzyme [60]. The increased abundance of SYCP1 in stimulated cells was associated with 2 spots with a discrete difference in pI,  indicating  possible  phosphorylation,  which  is  a  consequence of the activation of this molecule after binding Mg 2+ ions [60-63].

The  protein  TF3C4  (Supplementary  Fig. 4 ) promotes transcription initiation because it binds to the initiation complex  of  RNA  polymerase  III  and  its  components  [64].  The correlation  of  TF3C4  with  neutrophil  stimulation  has  not been  described  previously,  and  we  found  decreased  abundance of the spot containing this protein in neutrophils after stimulation. RIO kinase 1 is essential for rRNA function and cell survival because it participates in the cell cycle. [65, 66]. This kinase was identified only in quiescent neutrophils but has high autophosphorylation activity in the presence of ATP and  manganese,  resulting  in  enzyme  activation  [67].  The downregulation  of  TF3C4  and  RIO1  is  likely  due  to  posttranslational  processing  because  there  is  strong  evidence  of increased transcription in stimulated neutrophils [64, 65]. For RIO1, the expected modification would be phosphorylation, which  would  render  the  protein  undetectable  based  on  gel position  after  stimulation.  Consistent  with  this,  the  proteins CSDE1 and RB12B were detected exclusively in stimulated neutrophils  (Supplementary  Fig. 4 ).  Both  bind  to  mRNA, and RB12B modulates translation by participating in mRNA processing (splicing) [68,69].

## Structure and Motility

The  complex  formed  by  TRIO  and  TARA,  two  F-actin binding  proteins,  is  responsible  for  the  organization  of  the cytoskeleton, spreading, and migration. The GEF domain of

the TRIO protein can activate Rac1 and Rho G, which assist in cell motility [70]. The TRIO protein (Supplementary Fig. 4 )  was  found  only  in  quiescent  neutrophils  in  the  present study, but the undetectable levels in the activated cells might be  explained  by  its  sequestration  in  the  covalent  complex. Further  discussion  about  proteins  related  to  structure  and motility can be found in the supplementary material.

## CONCLUSIONS

The stimulation of neutrophils by PAF results in the production of small quantities of ROS, reflecting a cell primed for a more intense inflammatory response. This study demonstrated the differential abundance of proteins not yet associated with neutrophils or neutrophil activation. It is possible that  post-translational  modifications  after  stimulation  prevented the identification of some proteins already known to be  modified  or  differentially  regulated  between  the  neutrophil states. The group of detected regulated proteins suggests a mechanism of activation and modulation of the inflammatory response in the intracellular fraction of neutrophils that involves an increase in calcium flux, reduced protection from oxidative  stress,  and  an  increase  in  protein  turnover  and modification. All these processes are important for the effective  initiation and control of an inflammatory response. The main finding of this study was the identification of proteins that  are  related  to  the  regulation  of  the  inflammatory  response. These proteins could be further investigated as drug and diagnostic targets to modulate and detect the inflammatory response  in diseases caused or  aggravated by misregulated inflammation.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The  authors  thank  Prof.  Magno  Junqueira  and  Prof. Gilberto Domont from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro  for  allowing  access  to  the  mass  spectrometry  lab  and for guidance in the LC-MS-MS experiments and Prof. Antonio  Teixeira  from  the  University  of  Brasilia  for  allowing access  to  the  flow  cytometer.  This  research  was  funded  by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq), Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES), Fundação de Apoio à Pesquisa do  Distrito  Federal  (FAP-DF),  Financiadora  de  Estudos  e Projetos  (FINEP),  Fundação  de  Empreendimentos  Científicos e Tecnológicos (FINATEC), and Fundação Universidade de Brasília (FUB-UnB).

## SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

Supplementary  material  is  available  on  the  publishers Web site along with the published article.

## REFERENCES

- [1] Kutukculer, N.; Azarsiz, E.;  Karaca, N.E.; Ulusoy, E.; Koturoglu, G.; Aksu, G. A Clinical and Laboratory Approach to the Evaluation of  Innate  Immunity  in  Pediatric  CVID  Patients. Front.  Immunol. , 2015 , 6 , 145.
- [2] Akinosoglou,  K.;  Alexopoulos,  D.  Use  of  antiplatelet  agents  in sepsis: a glimpse into the future. Thromb. Res. , 2014 , 133 , 131-138.

| [3]   | Botha,  A.J.;  Moore,  F.A.;  Moore,  E.E.;  Sauaia,  A.;  Banerjee,  A.;  Peterson, V.M. Early neutrophil sequestration after injury: a patho- genic mechanism for multiple organ failure.  J.  Trauma   , 1995 ,  39 ,                                                                                                                              |
|-------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [4]   | 411-417.  Fontes, B.; Fontes, W.; Utiyama, E.M.; Birolini, D. The efficacy of  loop  colostomy  for  complete  fecal  diversion.  Dis  Colon  Rectum   , 1988 ,  31 , 298-302.                                                                                                                                                                        |
| [5]   | Reiss, L.K.; Uhlig, U.; Uhlig, S. Models and mechanisms of acute  lung  injury  caused  by  direct  insults.  Eur.  J.  Cell  Biol.   , 2012 ,  91 ,  590-601.                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| [6]   | Botha,  A.J.;  Moore,  F.A.;  Moore,  E.E.;  Kim,  F.J.;  Banerjee,  A.;  Peterson,  V.M.  Postinjury  neutrophil  priming  and  activation:  an  early vulnerable window.  Surgery   , 1995 ,  118 ,  358-364; discussion                                                                                                                            |
| [7]   | 364-355.  Rodríguez, C.G.  Facultad de Ciências Químicas -Departamento de  Bioquímica  y  Biología  Molecular  Universidad  Complutense  de  Madrid 1993, p. 237.                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [8]   | Nascimento,  A.C.;  Zanotta,  L.C.;  Kyaw,  C.M.;  Schwartz,  E.N.;  Schwartz, C.A.; Sebben, A.; Sousa, M.V.; Fontes, W.; Castro, M.S.  Ocellatins:  new  antimicrobial  peptides  from  the  skin  secretion  of  the  South  American  frog  Leptodactylus  ocellatus  (Anura:  Lepto- dactylidae).  Protein J.   , 2004 ,  23 , 501-508.           |
| [9]   | Botha,  A.J.;  Moore,  F.A.;  Moore,  E.E.;  Fontes,  B.;  Banerjee,  A.;  Peterson, V.M. Postinjury neutrophil priming and activation states:  therapeutic challenges.  Shock   , 1995 ,  3 , 157-166.                                                                                                                                               |
| [10]  | El-Benna,  J.;  Dang,  P.M.;  Gougerot-Pocidalo,  M.A.;  Elbim,  C.  Phagocyte  NADPH  oxidase:  a  multicomponent  enzyme  essential  for  host  defenses.  Arch.  Immunol.  Ther.  Exp.  (Warsz)   , 2005 ,  53 ,  199-206.                                                                                                                         |
| [11]  | Swain,  S.D.;  Rohn  T.T.;  Quinn  M.T.  Neutrophil  Priming  in  Host  Defense:Role of Oxidants as Priming Agents.  Antioxid. Redox Sig- nal.   , 2002 ,  4 , 69-83.                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| [12]  | Sheppard,  F.R.;  Kelher,  M.R.;  Moore,  E.E.;  McLaughlin,  N.J.;  Banerjee, A.; Silliman, C.C.  Structural organization of the neutro- phil  NADPH  oxidase:  phosphorylation  and  translocation  during  priming and activation.  J. Leukoc. Biol.   , 2005 ,  78 , 1025-1042.                                                                   |
| [13]  | McManus, L.M.; Pinckard, R.N. PAF, a putative mediator of oral  inflammation.  Crit. Rev. Oral. Biol. Med.   , 2000 ,  11 , 240-258.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| [14]  | Maciel, N.M.; Schwartz, C.A.; Rodrigues Pires Junior, O.; Sebben,  A.; Castro, M.S.; Sousa, M.V.; Fontes, W.; Ferroni Schwartz, E.N.  Composition of indolealkylamines of Bufo rubescens cutaneous se- cretions  compared  to  six  other  Brazilian  bufonids  with  phyloge- netic implications.  Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B Biochem. Mol. Biol.   , |
| [15]  | 2003 ,  134 , 641-649.  Kitchen,  E.;  Rossi,  A.G.;  Condliffe,  A.M.;  Haslett,  C.;  Chilvers,  E.R. Demonstration of reversible priming of human neutrophils us- ing platelet-activating factor.  Blood   , 1996 ,  88 , 4330-4337.                                                                                                               |
| [16]  | de Souza Castro, M.; de Sa, N.M.; Gadelha, R.P.; de Sousa, M.V.;  Ricart,  C.A.;  Fontes,  B.;  Fontes,  W.  Proteome  analysis  of  resting                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|       | human neutrophils.  Protein Pept Lett   , 2006 ,  13 , 481-487.  Jethwaney,  D.;  Islam,  M.R.;  Leidal,  K.G.;  de  Bernabe,  D.B.;                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| [17]  | Campbell, K.P.; Nauseef, W.M.; Gibson, B.W.; Proteomic analysis  of  plasma  membrane  and  secretory  vesicles  from  human  neutro- phils.  Proteome Sci.   , 2007 ,  5 , 12.                                                                                                                                                                       |
| [18]  | Xu, P.; Crawford, M.; Way, M.; Godovac-Zimmermann, J.; Segal,  A.W.;  Radulovic,  M.  Subproteome  analysis  of  the  neutrophil  cy- toskeleton.  Proteomics   , 2009 ,  9 , 2037-2049.                                                                                                                                                              |
|       | ules.  Mol. Cell Proteom.   , 2005 ,  4 , 1503-1521.  analyses: good experimental design and planning.  Proteomics ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| [20]  | Cairns,  D.A.  Statistical  issues  in  quality  control  of  proteomic  11 ,  1037-1048.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| [21]  | Valledor, L.; Jorrin, J. Back to the basics: Maximizing the informa- tion  obtained  by  quantitative  two  dimensional  gel  electrophoresis  analyses  by  an  appropriate  experimental  design  and  statistical                                                                                                                                  |
| [22]  | analyses.  J. Proteom.   , 2011 ,  74 , 1-18.  Brown, R.A.; Lever, R.; Jones, N.A.; Page, C.P. Effects of heparin  and related molecules upon neutrophil aggregation and elastase re- lease in vitro.  Br. J. Pharmacol.   , 2003 ,  139 , 845-853.                                                                                                   |
| [23]  | Wrona,  M.;  Patel,  K.;  Wardman,  P.  Reactivity  of  2',7'- dichlorodihydrofluorescein  and  dihydrorhodamine  123  and  their  oxidized  forms  toward  carbonate,  nitrogen  dioxide,  and  hydroxyl  radicals.  Free Radic. Biol. Med.   , 2005 ,  38 , 262-270.                                                                                |

- [24] Bradford, M.M. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of proteindye binding. Anal. Biochem. , 1976 , 72 , 248-254.
- [25] Ramagli, L.S.; Rodriguez, L.V. Quantitation of microgram amounts of protein in two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis sample buffet. Electrophoresis , 1985 , 6 , 559-563.
- [26] Gorg,  A.;  Obermaier,  C.;  Boguth,  G.;  Harder,  A.;  Scheibe,  B.; Wildgruber,  R.;  Weiss,  W.  The  current  state  of  two-dimensional electrophoresis  with  immobilized  pH  gradients. Electrophoresis , 2000 , 21 , 1037-1053.
- [27] Horgan, G.W. Sample size and replication in 2D gel electrophoresis studies. J. Proteome Res. , 2007 , 6 , 2884-2887.
- [28] Biron, D.G.; Brun, C.; Lefevre T.; Lebarbenchon C.; Loxdale H.D.; Chevenet, F.; Brizard, J.; Thomas, F. The pitfalls of proteomics experiments  without  the  correct  use  of  bioinformatics  tools. Proteomics , 2006 , 6 , 5577-5596.
- [29] Shevchenko, A.; Wilm, M.; Vorm, O.; Mann, M. Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal. Chem. , 1996 , 68 , 850-858.
- [30] Thingholm,  T.E.;  Jorgensen,  T.J.;  Jensen,  O.N.;  Larsen,  M.R. Highly selective enrichment of phosphorylated peptides using titanium dioxide. Nat. Protoc. , 2006 , 1 , 1929-1935.
- [31] Zhang, X.; Shi, L.;  Shu, S.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, K.; Xu, N.;  Liu, S.; Roepstorff, P. An improved method of sample preparation on AnchorChip targets for MALDI-MS and MS/MS and its application in the liver proteome project. Proteomics , 2007 , 7 , 2340-2349.
- [32] Laugesen, S.; Roepstorff, P.; Combination of two matrices results in improved performance of MALDI MS for peptide mass mapping and protein analysis. J.  Am. Soc.  Mass Spectrom. , 2003 , 14 ,  9921002.
- [33] Blueggel,  M.;  Chamrad,  D.;  Meyer,  H.E.  Bioinformatics  in  proteomics. Curr. Pharmaceut. Biotechnol. , 2004 , 5 , 79-88.
- [34] Paba,  J.;  Ricart,  C.A.;  Fontes,  W.;  Santana,  J.M.;  Teixeira,  A.R.; Marchese, J.; Williamson, B.; Hunt, T.; Karger, B.L.; Sousa, M.V. Proteomic analysis of Trypanosoma cruzi developmental stages using isotope-coded affinity tag reagents. J Proteome Res. , 2004 , 3 , 517-524.
- [35] Junqueira,  M.;  Spirin,  V.;  Santana  Balbuena,  T.;  Waridel,  P.; Surendranath,  V.;  Kryukov,  G.;  Adzhubei,  I.;  Thomas,  H.;  Sunyaev, S.; Shevchenko, A. Separating the wheat from the chaff: unbiased filtering of background tandem mass spectra improves protein identification. J. Proteome Res. , 2008 , 7 , 3382-3395.
- [36] Frank,  A.;  Pevzner,  P.  PepNovo:  de  novo peptide  sequencing  via probabilistic network modeling. Anal. Chem. , 2005 , 77 , 964-973.
- [37] Junqueira, M.; Spirin, V.; Balbuena, T.S.; Thomas, H.; Adzhubei, I.;  Sunyaev, S.; Shevchenko, A. Protein identification pipeline for the homology-driven proteomics. J. Proteom. , 2008 , 71 , 346-356.
- [38] Chitale,  M.;  Hawkins,  T.;  Park,  C.;  Kihara,  D.  ESG:  extended similarity group method for automated protein function prediction. Bioinformatics , 2009 , 25 , 1739-1745.
- [39] Ashburner, M.; Ball,  C.A.; Blake, J.A.; Botstein,  D.; Butler, H.J.; Cherry,  M.;  Davis,  A.P.;  Dolinski,  K.;  Dwight,  S.S.;  Eppig,  J.T.; Harris, M.A.; Hill, D.P.; Issel-Tarver, L.; Kasarskis, A.; Lewis, S.; Matese, J.C.; Richardson, J.E.; Ringwald, M.; Rubin, G.M.; Sherlock,  G.  Gene  Ontology:  tool  for  the  unification  of  biology. Nat. Genet. , 2000 , 25 .
- [40] Chitale,  M.;  Hawkins,  T.;  Park,  C.;  Kihara,  D.  ESG:  extended similarity group method for automated protein function prediction. Bioinformatics , 2009 , 25 , 1739-1745.
- [41] Szalay,  J.;  Bruno,  P.;  Bhati,  R.;  Adjodha,  J.;  Schueler,  D.;  Summerville, V.; Vazeos, R. Associations of PKC isoforms with the cytoskeleton  of  B16F10  melanoma  cells. J.  Histochem.  Cytochem. , 2001 , 49 , 49-66.
- [42] Bostanci, N.; Thurnheer, T.; Aduse-Opoku, J.; Curtis, M.A.; Zinkernagel,  A.S.;  Belibasakis,  G.N.  Porphyromonas  gingivalis  regulates  TREM-1  in  human  polymorphonuclear  neutrophils  via  its gingipains. PLoS One , 2013 , 8 , e75784.
- [43] Steel,  H.C.;  Anderson,  R.  Dissociation  of  the  PAF-receptor  from NADPH oxidase  and adenylate  cyclase  in  human  neutrophils  results  in  accelerated  influx  and  delayed  clearance of  cytosolic  calcium. Br. J. Pharmacol. , 2002 , 136 , 81-89.
- [44] Mathison,  R.D.;  Befus,  A.D.;  Davison,  J.S.; Woodman,  R.C. Modulation of neutrophil function by the tripeptide feG. BMC Immunol. , 2003 , 4 , 3.
- [45] Teles, L.M.; Aquino, E.N.; Neves, A.C.; Garcia, C.H.; Roepstorff, P.; Fontes, B.; Castro, M.S.; Fontes, W. Comparison of the neutro-

phil proteome in trauma patients and normal controls. Protein Pept. Lett. , 19 , 663-672.

- [46] Tintinger,  G.;  Steel,  H.C.;  Anderson,  R.  Taming  the  neutrophil: calcium  clearance  and  influx  mechanisms  as  novel  targets  for pharmacological control. Clin. Exp. Immunol. , 2005 , 141 , 191-200.
- [47] Chernyavskaya, Y.; Ebert, A.M.; Milligan, E.; Garrity, D.M. Voltage-gated  calcium  channel  CACNB2  (beta2.1)  protein  is  required in the heart for control of cell proliferation and heart tube integrity. Dev. Dyn. , 241 , 648-662.
- [48] Fekete,  C.;  Freitas,  B.C.;  Zeold,  A.;  Wittmann,  G.;  Kadar,  A.; Liposits,  Z.;  Christoffolete,  M.A.;  Singru,  P.;  Lechan,  R.M.;  Bianco, A.C.; Gereben, B. Expression patterns of WSB-1 and USP-33 underlie cell-specific posttranslational control of type 2 deiodinase in the rat brain. Endocrinology , 2007 , 148 , 4865-4874.
- [49] Baker, P.R.; Schopfer, F.J.; O'Donnell, V.B.; Freeman, B.A. Convergence of nitric oxide and lipid signaling: anti-inflammatory nitro-fatty acids. Free Radic. Biol. Med. , 2009 , 46 , 989-1003.
- [50] Putnam,  C.D.;  Arvai,  A.S.;  Bourne,  Y.;  Tainer,  J.A.  Active  and inhibited  human  catalase  structures:  ligand  and  NADPH  binding and catalytic mechanism. J. Mol. Biol. , 2000 , 296 , 295-309.
- [51] Pope, A.J.; Druhan, L.; Guzman, J.E.; Forbes, S.P.; Murugesan, V.; Lu,  D.;  Xia,  Y.;  Chicoine,  L.G.;  Parinandi,  N.L.;  Cardounel,  A.J. Role of DDAH-1 in lipid peroxidation product-mediated inhibition of  endothelial  NO  generation. Am J Physiol.  Cell  Physiol. , 2007 , 293 , C1679-1686.
- [52] Kimoto, M.; Miyatake, S.; Sasagawa, T.; Yamashita, H.; Okita, M.; Oka, T.; Ogawa, T.; Tsuji, H. Purification, cDNA cloning and expression of human NG,NG-dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase. Eur. J. Biochem. , 1998 , 258 , 863-868.
- [53] Okabe-Kado, J.; Kasukabe, T.; Honma, Y. Expression of cell surface NM23 proteins of human leukemia cell lines of various cellular  lineage  and  differentiation  stages. Leuk.  Res. , 2002 , 26 ,  569576.
- [54] Valentijn,  L.J.;  Koster,  J.;  Versteeg,  R.  Read-through  transcript from  NM23-H1  into  the  neighboring  NM23-H2  gene  encodes  a novel protein, NM23-LV. Genomics , 2006 , 87 , 483-489.
- [55] Okabe-Kado, J.; Kasukabe, T.; Honma, Y.; Kobayashi, H.; Maseki, N.;  Kaneko,  Y.  Extracellular  NM23-H1  protein  inhibits  the  survival of primary cultured normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and activates the cytokine production. Int.  J.  Hematol. , 2009 , 90 , 143-152.
- [56] Braun,  S.;  Mauch,  C.;  Boukamp,  P.;  Werner,  S.  Novel  roles  of NM23 proteins in skin homeostasis, repair and disease. Oncogene , 2007 , 26 , 532-542.
- [57] Stankova,  J.;  Rola-Pleszczynski,  M.;  Dubois,  C.M.  Granulocytemacrophage  colony-stimulating  factor  increases  5-lipoxygenase

gene  transcription  and  protein  expression  in  human  neutrophils. Blood , 1995 , 85 , 3719-3726.

- [58] Kikuchi, M.; Hatano, N.; Yokota, S.; Shimozawa, N.; Imanaka, T.; Taniguchi, H. Proteomic analysis of rat liver peroxisome: presence of  peroxisome-specific  isozyme  of  Lon  protease. J.  Biol.  Chem. , 2004 , 279 , 421-428.
- [59] Dubiel, W.; Ferrell, K.; Pratt, G.; Rechsteiner, M. Subunit 4 of the 26 S protease is a member of a novel eukaryotic ATPase family. J. Biol. Chem. , 1992 , 267 , 22699-22702.
- [60] Zhang, M.;  Liu,  J.;  Kim,  Y.;  Dixon,  J.E.;  Pfaff,  S.L.;  Gill,  G.N.; Noel,  J.P.;  Zhang,  Y.  Structural  and  functional  analysis  of  the phosphoryl  transfer  reaction  mediated  by  the  human  small  Cterminal  domain  phosphatase,  Scp1. Protein  Sci. , 2010 , 19 ,  974986.
- [61] Heyting, C. Synaptonemal complexes: structure and function. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. , 1996 , 8 , 389-396.
- [62] Zhang, Y.; Kim, Y.; Genoud, N.; Gao, J.; Kelly, J.W.; Pfaff, S.L.; Gill, G.N.; Dixon, J.E.; Noel, J.P. Determinants for dephosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain by Scp1. Mol. Cell , 2006 , 24 , 759-770.
- [63] Zhang, M.; Cho, E.J.; Burstein, G.; Siegel, D.; Zhang, Y. Selective inactivation of a human neuronal silencing phosphatase by a small molecule inhibitor. ACS Chem. Biol. , 6 , 511-519.
- [64] Moir,  R.D.;  Willis,  I.M.  Tetratricopeptide  repeats  of  Tfc4  and  a limiting  step  in  the  assembly  of  the  initiation  factor  TFIIIB. Adv. Protein Chem. , 2004 , 67 , 93-121.
- [65] LaRonde-LeBlanc, N.; Wlodawer, A. The RIO kinases: an atypical protein kinase family required for ribosome biogenesis and cell cycle progression. Biochim. Biophys. Acta , 2005 , 1754 , 14-24.
- [66] LaRonde-LeBlanc, N.; Wlodawer, A. A family portrait of the RIO kinases. J. Biol. Chem. , 2005 , 280 , 37297-37300.
- [67] Laronde-Leblanc,  N.;  Guszczynski,  T.;  Copeland,  T.;  Wlodawer, A. Structure and activity of the atypical serine kinase Rio1. FEBS J. , 2005 , 272 , 3698-3713.
- [68] Tsvetanova,  N.G.;  Klass,  D.M.;  Salzman,  J.;  Brown,  P.O.  Proteome-wide  search  reveals  unexpected  RNA-binding  proteins  in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS One , 2010 , 5 (9), e12671.
- [69] Trollmann, R.; Rehrauer, H.; Schneider, C.; Krischke, G.; Huemmler,  N.;  Keller,  S.;  Rascher,  W.;  Gassmann,  M.  Lategestational systemic hypoxia leads to a similar early gene response in mouse placenta and developing brain. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. , 2010 , 299 (6), R1489-1499.
- [70] Seipel,  K.;  O'Brien,  S.P.;  Iannotti,  E.;  Medley,  Q.G.;  Streuli,  M. Tara, a novel F-actin binding protein, associates with the Trio guanine nucleotide exchange factor and regulates actin cytoskeletal organization. J. Cell Sci. , 2001 , 114 , 389-399.