<!-- image -->

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

<!-- image -->

Microbes and Infection 5 (2003) 1337-1344

<!-- image -->

www.elsevier.com/locate/micinf

## Forum in immunology

## Regulation of the neutrophil-mediated inflammatory response to infection

Scott D. Kobayashi 1 , Jovanka M. Voyich 1 , Frank R. DeLeo *

Laboratory of Human Bacterial Pathogenesis, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 903 S. 4th Street, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA

## Abstract

Humanpolymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) are the first line of defense against invading microorganisms and contribute significantly to inflammation. Recent evidence suggests that resolution of neutrophil-mediated inflammation is facilitated by an apoptosis differentiation program, a final stage of transcriptionally regulated PMN maturation that is accelerated significantly by phagocytosis. '2003 Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

Inflammation; Neutrophils; Phagocytosis; Apoptosis

## 1. Introduction

Human polymorphonuclear leukocytes (neutrophils or PMNs) are essential for innate host defense against invading microorganisms, such as bacteria and fungi, and eliminate pathogens by a process known as phagocytosis (Fig. 1) [1]. During phagocytosis, PMNs produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), including superoxide, hydrogen peroxide and hypochlorous acid, and release cytotoxic granule components into pathogen-containing phagocytic vacuoles. Comprehensive views of phagocytosis and associated microbicidal mechanisms are discussed in other articles in this Forum. Neutrophil ROS and granule components are highly effective at killing most human pathogens in vitro. However, some human pathogens have evolved mechanisms to inhibit phagocytosis and avoid death resulting from PMN-derived microbicidal products (immune evasion is reviewed by L.-A. Allen, this issue) [2-4].

Inasmuch as PMNs play a critical role in innate immunity, they are a central component of the inflammatory response. It is widely accepted that neutrophils contribute to inflammatory diseases [5]. However, relatively little is known about

Fig. 1. PMN phagocytosis. Interaction of group A Streptococcus (blue) with a human PMN. The image was obtained using a Hitachi S4500 filed emission scanning electron microscope (Hitachi High Technologies America, Pleasanton, CA) as described [4].

<!-- image -->

the molecular basis for resolution of PMN-mediated inflammation. There is evidence that PMN apoptosis plays a key role in resolving infection and the inflammatory response [6]. Neutrophils accumulate rapidly at sites of infection, and tion should they undergo necrotic lysis and release cytotoxic granule contents and ROS onto host tissues [5,7]. Therefore, it follows that timely and vigilant execution of a controlled cell death program in human PMNs after phagocytosis is important for preventing damage to healthy tissues, and necessary for resolution of infection. To summarize, apoptosis

can be viewed as the terminal stage of PMN-induced inflammation.

Although significant progress has been made toward understanding leukocyte apoptosis, the molecular mechanisms responsible for initiation and execution of programmed cell death in neutrophils, especially after phagocytosis, are incompletely characterized. Several recent discoveries indicate that phagocytosis initiates a molecular cascade of events that accelerates apoptosis in human PMNs [8-10]. Based on those findings, it was proposed that programmed cell death in activated human PMNs is regulated by an apoptosis differentiation program, a final stage of transcriptional maturity or hematopoietic differentiation that facilitates resolution of inflammation [9]. This led to the hypothesis that the apoptosis differentiation program is crucial for normal resolution of inflammation following bacterial infections in humans. This review will focus on phagocyte-microbe interaction, with special emphasis on the outcome for neutrophils following phagocytosis.

## 2. Neutrophils in the inflammatory response to infection

Eradication of microbial pathogens by neutrophils is a complex, multi-step process. As a first step, PMNs are rapidly recruited from circulation and bone marrow reserves to sites of microbial invasion by host and pathogen-derived stimuli. Recruitment of PMNs to sites of infection and subsequent cell activation results in inflammation and elimination of invading microbes.

## 2.1. Role of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the initiation of inflammation

PMNs are recruited to sites of infection by chemotactic signals from chemokines, cytokines, matrix metalloproteinases and products of invading microorganisms to abate or eliminate the spread of infections. Host-derived chemotactic factors are important in regulating the inflammatory response, and a link between resolution of the inflammatory response and modulation of receptors for chemotaxis following PMN phagocytosis is discussed below. In addition to recruiting neutrophils, many chemotactic factors, including lipopolysaccharide (LPS), tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and platelet-activating factor, significantly enhance PMN responses to subsequent stimuli. For example, priming with LPS significantly increases superoxide generation by neutrophils upon exposure to N -formylmethionylleucylphenylalanine (fMLF) [11], a bacteria-derived peptide. The importance of LPS in PMN chemotaxis was demonstrated in vivo with LPS-binding protein- and CD14-deficient mice during Salmonella typhimurium infection [12]. In those studies, the absence of LPS-binding protein and CD14 caused delayed neutrophil migration, which resulted in uncontrolled growth of S. typhimurium and death of the animals. These findings underscore the importance of PMN recruitment to sites of infection during the inflammatory response.

## 2.2. Phagocytosis of microorganisms

PMNsareequipped to directly recognize molecules on the surface of invading microbes [1]. For example, pattern recognition molecules such as peptidoglycan recognition protein (PGLYRP) [13], CD14 [14], and Toll-like receptors [15] present on neutrophils interact with peptidoglycan produced by Gram-positive bacteria, including Streptococcus pyogenes and Staphylococcus aureus , and LPS generated by Gram-negative microorganisms, such as S. typhimurium and Escherichia coli . Although microbial surfaces can be recognized directly by PMNs, binding and ingestion by PMNs is greatly enhanced if microbes are opsonized with serum host proteins such as complement and antibody. The benefit in opsonizing microorganisms for PMN-mediated clearance can be illustrated with the human bacterial pathogen S. aureus (Fig. 2). Opsonization of S. aureus with human serum increased PMN phagocytosis eightfold within 10 min (6.5 - 6.4% for unopsonized S. aureus vs. 53.0 - 12.7% for opsonized bacteria) (Fig. 2). Since the time required for PMN-mediated clearance of pathogens is likely a determinant in the pathophysiology of disease, opsonization of microbes is an important component to innate host defense. Activation of either the classical (by antigen-specific antibody) or alternative complement cascade promotes the deposition of C3b, iC3b, and C1q on microbial surfaces. In the absence of antigen-specific antibody, serum complement proteins opsonize microbes and are recognized by specific receptors at the surface of human PMNs. Neutrophil receptors for complement include C1qR, CR1 (CD35), CR3 (CD11b/CD18), and CR4 (CD11c/CD18) and receptors specific for the Fc-region of antibody such as (Fc e RI), Fc e RII (CD23), Fc a R (CD89), Fc c RI (CD64), Fc c RIIa (CD32) and Fc RIIIb (CD16). These receptors work coordinately and c play a vital role in mediating host responses to clear infection and resolve inflammation.

Fig. 2. Effect of opsonization on the phagocytosis of S. aureus by human PMNs. Unopsonized (circle) or serum-opsonized (square) S. aureus strain COL was combined with human PMNs at a 10 bacteria: 1 PMN ratio, as indicated. Phagocytosis was measured with flow cytometry, as described [4].

<!-- image -->

## 2.3. Microbicidal activity of PMNs: contribution to inflammation

Phagocytosis of microorganisms by PMNs activates an NADPH-dependent oxidase, which produces superoxide (reviewed by D. Roos et al., this issue). Superoxide is rapidly converted to other highly toxic ROS such as hydrogen peroxide and hypochlorous acid that efficiently kill ingested microorganisms [1]. In addition, cytoplasmic PMN granules fuse with forming phagosomes during ingestion of microbes, and this degranulation process enriches phagocytic vacuoles with microbicidal enzymes and peptides (for a comprehensive view of degranulation see article by M. Faurschou and N. Borregaard). The most efficient mechanism used by PMNsto kill ingested microorganisms utilizes hypochlorous acid generated from myeloperoxidase-catalyzed halogenation of hydrogen peroxide. The importance of NADPH oxidase and ROS in the process of microbial killing is illustrated in individuals with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). These individuals have molecular defects in NADPH oxidase and as a result, are highly susceptible to bacterial and fungal infections with catalase-positive microorganisms including S. aureus, Burkholderia cepacia, Serratia marcescens , and Aspergillus spp. [16]. However, there is significant evidence to suggest that the microbicidal capacity of PMNs also depends on the activity of granule proteases, which requires potassium and neutral pH [17]. Importantly, pathogens such as Candida albicans and S. aureus (prevalent sources of infection for CGD patients) cannot be killed by oxygendependent mechanisms alone [17]. These findings suggest that efficient eradication of pathogens by neutrophils require both oxygen-dependent and oxygen-independent mechanisms.

Although the microbicidal activity of human PMNs is highly effective at preventing the spread of infectious agents, neutrophil cytotoxicity is not specific for invading pathogens and is the underlying cause of inflammatory disorders. For example, lethal necrotizing pneumonia can be caused by S. aureus strains carrying the gene encoding Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL) [18]. PVL produced by S. aureus destroys plasma membrane integrity of neutrophils, releasing ROS and granule enzymes [19]. Thus, the massive damage to lung tissue is likely due, in part, to the effects of neutrophilderived anti-microbial components following cell lysis rather than those produced by S. aureus . In support of this idea, pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae , bacteria which induce PMN apoptosis rather than lysis [20], is normally resolved with little or no tissue damage [7]. These two examples of human disease illustrate the importance of timely removal of pathogens and host cells from infected sites.

## 2.4. Evasion of human innate host defense

Evasion of phagocyte killing by microbial pathogens is a problem far more common to macrophages than PMNs. In general, this is because human neutrophils possess signifi-

cantly greater microbicidal capacity and have a higher rate of turnover by comparison. The longer lifespan of macrophages is more conducive for growth and survival of intracellular pathogens such as Shigella flexneri, Salmonella spp., and Myocbacterium tuberculosis . In support of this idea, Anaplasma phagocytophilum , the causative agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, is the only pathogen known conclusively to survive within PMNs and can prolong cell survival. Modulation of host cell survival by microorganisms is clearly an important pathogen strategy and is discussed below. Many of the pathogens that evade macrophage killing do so by surviving within these cells. By contrast, the mechanisms used by microorganisms that are effective at avoiding PMNkilling are directed at blocking phagocytosis and PMN activation. For example, group A Streptococcus (GAS) is successful at evading killing by PMNs to cause human infections such as pharyngitis and necrotizing fasciitis. This is due, in part, to the ability of GAS secreted proteins to block phagocytosis [2-4]. GAS Mac protein (a bacterial homolog of CD11b) inhibits opsonophagocytosis and production of ROS [2]. Streptococcal inhibitor of complement (Sic) is a secreted protein that contributes to persistence of GAS in the upper respiratory tract and is associated with epidemics. Sic alters PMN phagocytosis per se by associating with ezrin and possibly moesin [3]. We recently identified a genetic program used by GAS to evade destruction by PMNs and found that GAS up-regulates (among other things) antioxidant molecules (such as peroxidases) and genes encoding proteins involved in cell wall synthesis, which presumably contribute to its ability to survive harsh effects of ROS and granule components [4]. Importantly, spread of infection and unresolved inflammation are general consequences of immune evasion by microbial pathogens.

## 2.5. Phagocyte apoptosis is modulated by ingestion of microorganisms

There is accumulating evidence that regulation of PMN turnover at sites of infection is essential for resolution of inflammation and disease. Apoptosis or programmed cell death is the mechanism by which neutrophil turnover is regulated [21]. Inasmuch as apoptosis is critical for resolution of infection and the inflammatory response, some microorganisms exploit programmed cell death in phagocytes to contribute to the disease. Zychlinsky and coworkers [22,23] have demonstrated that bacterial pathogens such as Shigella flexneri and Salmonella spp. induce rapid apoptosis in macrophages. Macrophage apoptosis also appears to be an indirect mechanism for infection of colonic basolateral epithelial cells by S. flexneri [24]. Based on observations from pathogen-macrophage interactions, it has been proposed that apoptosis induced by bacterial pathogens may serve to deplete effector cells of the immune system [24]. Although this hypothesis may be true for macrophages, given that they require time to function as antigen-presenting cells, it would not likely be an effective mechanism to alter the role of PMNs in fighting infectious disease. This is because massive

numbers of neutrophils could infiltrate infected areas and kill invading microorganisms very rapidly, before the onset of apoptosis. Several lines of recent evidence support this idea. First, the processes of phagocytosis and cell activation per se induce PMN apoptosis [8]. Second, phagocytosis of microorganisms induces PMN apoptosis [6], which is likely a result of the general process initiated by cell activation. We found that several human bacterial pathogens, including S. aureus, Listeria monocytogenes , and B. cepacia , induce PMN apoptosis in vitro, albeit to varied degrees (data not shown). One of the interesting findings in those studies is that induction of PMN apoptosis by bacterial pathogens, with one exception, mirrors that induced by receptor-mediated phagocytosis (data not shown). Thus, it seems reasonable to conclude that PMN apoptosis is a healthy mechanism to clear host cells that have completed the task of containing and killing infectious microbes. On the other hand, there is evidence to suggest that delaying PMN apoptosis or inducing neutrophil necrosis promotes disease. A. phagocytophilum delays apoptosis to survive within neutrophils, thus, allowing the organism time to replicate [25]. As discussed earlier, S. aureus strains carrying the gene encoding PVL cause significant disease and tissue damage, presumably because PMNs undergo necrotic lysis rather than apoptosis. Taken together, these studies suggest that a thorough understanding of the molecular basis of neutrophil apoptosis and how it is modulated by microorganisms will provide important insight into resolution of infectious and inflammatory diseases.

## 3. Resolution of PMN-mediated inflammation and infection

Although progress has been made toward understanding the role of apoptosis in the resolution of inflammation and during interaction with microorganisms, our knowledge of this process in a global context is quite limited. Therefore, a thorough understanding of transcriptionally regulated processes in activated neutrophils is critical towards defining the relationship between phagocytosis, apoptosis, and ultimately, the resolution of inflammatory responses.

## 3.1. PMN apoptosis is regulated at the level of gene transcription

Studies of gene expression in maturing myeloid precursor cells have shown that active transcription is important for PMNdifferentiation and synthesis of granule proteins [26,27]. With the exception of cytokine and chemokine synthesis, there is a paucity of information regarding gene transcription in activated PMNs. From a molecular standpoint, most physiological processes are ultimately regulated at the level of gene transcription. Therefore, it is likely that transcription in neutrophils governs numerous cellular processes in addition to maturation, differentiation and cytokine production.

Recently, we used oligonucleotide microarrays to identify transcriptional responses resulting from receptor-mediated

phagocytosis in human neutrophils. Within 90 min, 256 genes are induced or repressed following receptormediated phagocytosis [8]. Unexpectedly, more than 30 of these genes encode proteins involved at least three distinct apoptotic pathways. For example, apoptosis-related genes such as RAIDD, GADD45 , TRAF2, PKR b , and FAN are induced, whereas DEDD, CASP3, TEGT, TP53BP, NR3C1 , and BCL2L1 are repressed following phagocytosis. Further, genes encoding four nuclear orphan receptors, TR3, NOR1, NURR1 , and NR1D2 , were up-regulated. These findings suggest that the mechanism which induces apoptosis after phagocytosis is set into motion very early after ingestion. By extending the period of time after phagocytosis for the analysis of gene expression (from 90 min to 3 and 6 h), we identified 94 cell fate-related genes that are differentially regulated, including up-regulation of key apoptosis factors such as BAX, TLR2 , and CASP1 [8]. The onset of neutrophil programmed cell death correlates precisely with the regulation of apoptosis-related genes, which implies that PMN apoptosis is regulated, in part, at the level of gene transcription. Importantly, these findings were substantiated using a variety of human bacterial pathogens, all of which resulted in the induction of rapid apoptosis and similar changes in gene expression patterns (data not shown). Further evidence that neutrophil apoptosis is transcriptionally regulated is provided by the finding that treatment of neutrophils with actinomycin D or cycloheximide accelerates PMN apoptosis [28]. The difference between survival and apoptotic cell death in neutrophils may be the result of a fine balance between pro- and anti-apoptotic factors. Thus, it is likely that accelerated apoptosis in actinomycin D or cycloheximidetreated neutrophils is the result of a paucity of anti-apoptotic effectors in the absence of new transcription or translation. This idea is supported by the observation that there is differential regulation of genes encoding significant numbers of both pro- and anti-apoptosis factors in human PMNs after phagocytosis [8]. We note that many genes (&gt;20) encoding known pro-apoptosis molecules are up-regulated, whereas genes encoding anti-apoptosis factors are either downregulated or not differentially regulated [8].

## 3.2. Pathway for ceramide synthesis is up-regulated

Glycosphingolipids and ceramide regulate many processes in eukaryotic cells, including apoptosis [29]. We found that 10 genes involved in glycosphingolipid metabolism, including those encoding hexosaminidase subunits A and B, acid and neutral sphingomyelinases, a -galactosidase, sialidase 1, arylsulfatase E, ceramide glucosyltransferase, and sialyltransferease 9, are up-regulated during PMN apoptosis following phagocytosis [8,9] (Fig. 3, yellow boxes). Further, up-regulation of sialidase, the enzyme that cleaves sialic acid from ganglioside M3 (GM3), was accompanied by a corresponding increase in the gene encoding cathepsin A, also known as protective protein (Fig. 3). This observation provides intrinsic support to the idea that the pathway is up-regulated because sialidase, cathepsin A and b -galacto-

Fig. 3. A pathway for gene-regulated glycosphingolipid metabolism. Changes in PMN gene expression were measured by oligonucleotide arrays, as described [8,9] and are represented as relative increase (yellow boxes) or decrease (gray box) compared with unstimulated cells. (+)/(-), two to fivefold change; (+ +)/ (- -), five to eightfold change; (+ + +)/(- - -), eight- or greater fold change. White boxes, not differentially expressed. Solid black arrows indicate up-regulated pathways identified during phagocytosis; dotted gray arrows indicate down-regulated pathways.

<!-- image -->

sidase form a functional trimeric complex. These data suggest that products of the glycosphingolipid metabolism pathway, GM3, lactosylceramide, glucosylceramide, and ceramide, are gene-regulated during PMN apoptosis. Importantly, ceramide is a direct effector of multiple apoptosis pathways, such as those mediated by ceramide-activated protein kinase, cathepsin D, protein kinase C, Raf-1/ERK, and protein phosphatases (reviewed in ref. [29]).

## 3.3. Down-regulation of pro-inflammatory capacity following phagocytosis

Several lines of evidence indicate that pro-inflammatory capacity of human PMNs is also regulated at the level of gene expression during apoptosis. First, genes encoding 133 key pro-inflammatory mediators or signal transduction molecules, including receptors for IL-8, IL-10, IL-13, IL-15, IL-17, IL18, C1q, and formyl peptide; Toll-like receptor 6, CD29, CD31, Fc c RIIB (CD32), and 2 immunoglobulin-like receptors (LILRB2 and LILRA1), are down-regulated during the initial stages of phagocytosis-induced PMN apoptosis. These results demonstrate that repression of genes encoding important innate immune effectors accompanies reduced PMN function during apoptosis. Second, the expression of genes encoding the majority of up-regulated pro-inflammatory molecules decreases rapidly after the initiation of PMN apoptosis. This finding is especially evident in the expression of genes encoding up-regulated pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors, including TNF- , VEGF, OSM, a IL-6, CXCL2, and CXCL3 [10]. These observations indicate that pro-inflammatory signals up-regulated due to phagocytosis/PMN activation are subsequently repressed at the onset of apoptosis. Phagocytosis-induced PMN apoptosis is accompanied by a decrease in IL-1 a transcript, which results

in a concomitant decrease in the corresponding level of IL-1 a protein [10]. Previous studies have shown that pro-IL-1 a , the fully active IL-1 a precursor, is released upon necrotic cell lysis [30]. Since IL-1 a plays a notable role in the initiation of inflammation, it is likely that down-regulation of this cytokine by PMNs during apoptosis facilitates termination of the inflammatory response.

Repression of genes encoding CD31 and CXCR2 correlates with down-regulation of the surface expression of these proteins during activation-induced neutrophil apoptosis [10]. The finding that CXCR2 is down-regulated is significant, because the receptor plays a prominent role in modulation of PMNinflammatory responses such as chemotaxis. Based on those observations, it is likely that down-regulation of CXCR2 during apoptosis contributes to the resolution of inflammation following neutrophil activation. Consistent with this idea, 22 genes encoding proteins involved in phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and calcium signal transduction pathways, including PI3K, p110 a (PIK3CA), PI3K, p110 d (PIK3CD), and PI3K, p110 c (PIK3CG), are downregulated during PMN apoptosis following phagocytosis [10] (Fig. 4). This finding is intriguing, because ligation of receptors such as CXCR2 activates PI3Ks, which regulate a balance between phosphoinositide 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) and phosphoinositide 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) to modulate downstream signal transduction and cell activation (Fig. 4). These studies provide strong evidence that pro-inflammatory mediators and the signal transduction pathways linking them to cellular responses are down-regulated at the level of gene expression during PMN apoptosis. Although there is clearly a need for additional studies, these initial observations suggest that down-regulation of pro-inflammatory responses during apoptosis represents one of several key steps involved in the resolution of inflammation.

Fig. 4. Gene-regulated PI3K/AKT metabolism and calcium signal transduction. Differentially regulated genes identified 3 and 6 h following phagocytosis were assigned to phosphoinositide metabolism and calcium-mediated signal transduction pathways (based on Ref. [10]). Signs and colors are the same as described in the legend for Fig. 3. Spheres indicate predicted up- (green) or down- (red) regulated products based on the gene expression data. Gene expression levels were determined as described [9]. (VH) very high expression, (H) high expression, (M) moderate expression, (L) low expression, (VL) very low expression, (A) absent.

<!-- image -->

## 3.4. Redox balance, cell detoxification and metabolism during PMN apoptosis

To ensure safe removal from circulation and tissues, it is important that neutrophils undergoing apoptosis are readily recognized and ingested by macrophages. There is recent

evidence to suggest that neutrophil detoxification directed from within the cell is important in limiting host tissue damage that would otherwise result from necrotic lysis. Genes involved in glutathione and thioredoxin metabolism and heme catabolism are up-regulated during the induction of programmed cell death after neutrophil phagocytosis [9].

Fig. 5. Neutrophil apoptosis differentiation program. Gene-regulated pathways were determined based on Refs. [8-10].

<!-- image -->

Moreover, we found that PMNs undergoing activationinduced apoptosis contain more reduced glutathione and have higher c -glutamyltransferase activity, a key enzyme of the c -glutamyl cycle involved in glutathione metabolism and synthesis [9]. These observations suggest that regulating oxidative stress and limiting potential for oxidant damage are a high priority for neutrophils during the initial stages of apoptosis. Catabolism of heme diminishes potential for the production of toxic metabolites and generates bilirubin, which has antioxidant properties [31]. These detoxificationredox systems require NADPH to function. Therefore, it is not surprising that genes encoding transkeltolase and transaldolase, both necessary for synthesis of NADPH by the hexose monophosphate shunt, are up-regulated [9]. Consistent with those data, PMNs undergoing apoptosis utilize more glucose and produce more lactate than unstimulated PMNs [9]. Taken together, these observations demonstrate that metabolic pathways critical to oxidative stress responses in human PMNs are regulated at the level of gene expression during apoptosis. Further, these studies provide evidence that the initiation of activation-induced apoptosis in neutrophils stimulates self-directed detoxification, an event which likely facilitates removal of PMNs by macrophages.

## 4. Neutrophil apoptosis differentiation program

The finding that human PMNs differentially regulate ~800 genes encoding proteins of known function within a relatively short period (6 h) after phagocytosis is remarkable, considering that these cells have a limited lifespan and undergo rapid turnover [10]. Inasmuch as PMN apoptosis is likely the ultimate result of healthy resolution of bacterial infection, we propose that transcriptionally regulated pathways in activated human PMNs comprise an apoptosis differentiation program (Fig. 5). The apoptosis differentiation

program represents a final stage of transcriptionally regulated PMN maturation or hematopoietic differentiation, which is accelerated significantly by phagocytosis. To date, there is evidence that the apoptosis differentiation program regulates pro-inflammatory capacity, responses to oxidative stress, energy metabolism, and programmed cell death. These studies indicate that the apoptosis differentiation program could be critical for the resolution of inflammation during infection, because it would dampen local tissue destruction, diminish further inflammation and recruitment of immune cells, and facilitate termination of the innate immune response by limiting pro-inflammatory capacity. It will be important to determine whether specific bacterial pathogens alter the PMN apoptosis program to facilitate disease progression or contribute to chronic (neutrophil-mediated) inflammation.

## Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. Mark T. Quinn (Montana State University, MT,USA)forcritical review of the manuscript and Dr. David W. Dorward (Rocky Mountain Laboratories, MT, USA) for assistance with the scanning electron microscope.

## References

- [1] W.M. Nauseef, R.A. Clark, in: G.L. Mandel, J.E. Bennett, R. Dolin (Eds.), Basic Principles in the Diagnosis and Management of Infectious Diseases, 1, Churchill Livingstone, NewYork, NY, 2000, pp. 89112.
- [2] B. Lei, F.R. DeLeo, N.P. Hoe, M.R. Graham, S.M. Mackie, R.L. Cole, M. Liu, H.R. Hill, D.E. Low, M.J. Federle, J.R. Scott, J.M. Musser, Evasion of human innate and acquired immunity by a bacterial homolog of CD11b that inhibits opsonophagocytosis, Nat. Med. 7 (2001) 1298-1305.

- [3] N.P. Hoe, R.M. Ireland, F.R. DeLeo, B.B. Gowen, D.W. Dorward, J.M. Voyich, M. Liu, E.M. Burns, D.M. Culnan, A. Bretscher, J.M. Musser, Insight into the molecular basis of pathogen abundance: group A Streptococcus inhibitor of complement inhibits bacterial adherence and internalization into human cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99 (2002) 7646-7651.
- [4] J.M. Voyich, D.E. Sturdevant, K.R. Braughton, S.D. Kobayashi, B. Lei, K. Virtaneva, D.W. Dorward, J.M. Musser, F.R. DeLeo, Genome-wide protective response used by group A Streptococcus to evade destruction by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100 (2003) 1996-2001.
- [5] S.J. Weiss, Tissue destruction by neutrophils, New Engl. J. Med. 320 (1989) 365-376.
- [6] R.W. Watson, H.P. Redmond, J.H. Wang, C. Condron, D. BouchierHayes, Neutrophils undergo apoptosis following ingestion of Escherichia coli , J. Immunol. (1996) 3986-3992.
- [7] C. Haslett, Granulocyte apoptosis and its role in the resolution and control of lung inflammation, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 160 (1999) S5-S11.
- [8] S.D. Kobayashi, J.M. Voyich, C.L. Buhl, R.M. Stahl, F.R. DeLeo, Global changes in gene expression by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes during receptor-mediated phagocytosis: cell fate is regulated at the level of gene expression, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99 (2002) 6901-6906.
- [9] S.D. Kobayashi, J.M. Voyich, G.A. Somerville, H.L. Malech, J.M. Musser, F.R. DeLeo, An apoptosis differentiation program in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes facilitates resolution of inflammation, J. Leukocyte Biol. 73 (2003) 315-322.
- [10] S.D. Kobayashi, J.M. Voyich, K.R. Braughton, F.R. DeLeo, Downregulation of pro-inflammatory capacity during apoptosis in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes, J. Immunol. 170 (2003) 3357-3368.
- [11] F.R. DeLeo, J. Renee, S. McCormick, M. Nakamura, M. Apicella, J.P. Weiss, W.M. Nauseef, Neutrophils exposed to bacterial lipopolysaccharide upregulate NADPH oxidase assembly, J. Clin. Invest. 101 (1998) 455-463.
- [12] K.K.Yang, B.G. Dorner, U. Merkel, B. Ryffel, C. Schutt, D. Golenbock, M. Freeman, R.S. Jack, Neutrophil influx in response to a peritoneal infection with Salmonella is delayed in lipopolysaccharidebinding protein or CD14 deficient mice, J. Immunol. 169 (2002) 4475-4480.
- [13] C. Liu, E. Gelius, G. Liu, H. Steiner, R. Dziarski, Mammalian peptidoglycan recognition protein binds peptidoglycan with high affinity, is expressed in neutrophils, and inhibits bacterial growth, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 24490-24499.
- [14] G.S. Worthen, N. Avdi, S. Vukajlovich, P.S. Tobias, Neutrophil adherence induced by lipopolysaccharide in vitro. Role of plasma component interaction with lipopolysaccharide, J. Clin. Invest. 90 (1992) 2526-2535.
- [15] E.A. Kurt-Jones, L. Mandell, C. Whitney, A. Padgett, K. Gosselin, P.E. Newburger, R.W. Finberg, Role of toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in neutrophil activation: GM-CSF enhances TLR2 expression and TLR2-mediated interleukin 8 responses in neutrophils, Blood 100 (2002) 1860-1868.
- [16] J.A. Lekstrom-Heimes, J.I. Gallin, Immunodeficiency diseases caused by defects in phagocytes, Adv. Immunol. 343 (2000) 17031714.
- [17] E.P. Reeves, H. Lu, H.L. Jacobs, G.M. Messina, S. Bolsover, G. Gabella, E.O. Potma, A. Warley, J. Roes, A.W. Segal, Killing activity of neutrophils is mediated through activation of proteases by K + flux, Nature 416 (2002) 291-297.
- [18] Y. Gillet, B. Issartel, P. Vanhems, J.C. Fournet, G. Lina, M. Bes, F. Vandenesch,Y. Piemont, N. Brousse, D. Floret, J. Etienne, Association between Staphylococcus aureus strains carrying gene for PantonValentine leukocidin and highly lethal necrotising pneumonia in young immunocompetent patients, Lancet 359 (2002) 753-759.
- [19] B. Konig, G. Prevost, Y. Piemont, W. Konig, Effects of Staphylococcus aureus leukocidins on inflammatory mediator release from human granulocytes, J. Infect. Dis. 171 (1995) 607-613.
- [20] G. Zysk, L. Bejo, B.K. Schneider-Wald, R. Nau, H. Heinz, Induction of necrosis and apoptosis of neutrophil granulocytes by Streptococcus pneumoniae , Clin. Exp. Immunol. 122 (2000) 61-66.
- [21] J. Savill, Apoptosis in resolution of inflammation, J. Leukocyte Biol. 61 (1997) 375-380.
- [22] D. Hersh, D.M. Monack, M.R. Smith, N. Ghori, S. Falkow, A. Zychlinsky, The Salmonella invasin SipB induces macrophage apoptosis by binding to caspase-1, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96 (1999) 23962401.
- [23] A. Zychlinsky, M.C. Prevost, P.J. Sansonetti, Shigella flexneri induces apoptosis in infected macrophages, Nature 358 (1992) 167-169.
- [24] Y. Weinrauch, A. Zychlinsky, The induction of apoptosis by bacterial pathogens, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 53 (1999) 155-187.
- [25] T. Wang, S.E. Malawista, U. Pal, M. Grey, J. Meek, M. Akkoyunlu, V. Thomas, E. Fikrig, Superoxide anion production during Anaplasma phagocytophila infection, J. Infect. Dis. 186 (2002) 274-280.
- [26] N. Borregaard, K. Theilgaard-Monch, O.E. Sorensen, J.B. Cowland, Regulation of human neutrophil granule protein expression, Curr. Opin. Hematol. 8 (2001) 23-27.
- [27] A.D. Friedman, Transcriptional regulation of granulocyte and monocyte development, Oncogene 21 (2002) 3377-3390.
- [28] M.K.B. Whyte, J. Savill, L.C. Meagher, A. Lee, C. Haslett, Coupling of neutrophil apoptosis to recognition by macrophages: coordinated acceleration by protein synthesis inhibitors, J. Leukocyte Biol. 62 (1997) 195-202.
- [29] B.J. Pettus, C.E. Chalfant, Y.A. Hannun, Ceramide in apoptosis: an overview and current perspectives, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 585 (2002) 114-125.
- [30] C.A. Dinarello, third ed, in: J.I. Gallin, R. Snyderman (Eds.), Inflammation: Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates, LippincottWilliams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA, 1999, pp. 443-461.
- [31] R. Stocker, Y. Yamamoto, A.F. McDonagh, A.N. Glazer, B.N. Ames, Bilirubin is an antioxidant of possible physiological importance, Science 235 (1987) 1043-1046.