## I N V I T E D  R E V I E W

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## The emerging role for metabolism in fueling neutrophilic inflammation

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Tyler Morrison Emily R. Watts | Pranvera Sadiku | Sarah R. Walmsley |

University of Edinburgh Centre for Inflammation Research, Queen's Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

## Correspondence

Sarah R. Walmsley, Centre for Inflammation Research (CIR), The University of Edinburgh Medical School, BioQuarter, Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.

Email: sarah.walmsley@ed.ac.uk

## Funding information

Wellcome Trust, Grant/Award Number: 098516, 209220, 214383 and 224637/Z/21/Z

<!-- image -->

## Summary

Neutrophils are a critical element of host defense and are rapidly recruited to inflammatory sites. Such sites are frequently limited in oxygen and/or nutrient availability, presenting a metabolic challenge for infiltrating cells. Long believed to be uniquely dependent on glycolysis, it is now clear that neutrophils possess far greater metabolic plasticity than previously thought, with the capacity to generate energy stores and utilize extracellular proteins to fuel central carbon metabolism and biosynthetic activity. Out-  with cellular energetics, metabolic programs have also been implicated in the production of neutrophils and their progenitors in the bone marrow compartment, activation of neutrophil antimicrobial responses, inflammatory and cell survival signaling cascades, and training of the innate immune response. Thus, understanding the mechanisms by which metabolic processes sustain changes in neutrophil effector functions and how these are subverted in disease states provides exciting new avenues for the treatment of dysfunctional neutrophilic inflammation which are lacking in clinical practice to date.

## KEYWORDS

immunometabolism, inflammation, neutrophil, trained immunity

## 1   INTRODUCTION |

Neutrophils  respond  rapidly  to  infection  and  injury,  providing a critical first line of host defense. To do so, they employ a range of  specialized  functions  which  include  the  ability  to  phagocytose pathogens, release cytokines and cytotoxic mediators, and regulate other elements of the immune response. They are short-  lived cells, undergoing constitutive apoptosis and, as such, are in a state of high turnover. Each day large numbers are released into the blood where they circulate before being recruited to tissues in response to infection or injury signals. Here, they sense tissue injury and pathogens to

mount a proportionate response. These sites may be metabolically challenging  and  neutrophils  are  adapted  to  sense  and  adapt  their metabolic program, enabling them to continue to function in these hostile environments.

More broadly, the last decade has seen an explosion in our understanding  of  the  role  for  metabolism  in  regulating  immune  cell function in both health and disease. Far beyond the simple provision of  energy,  cellular  metabolites  enable  post-  translational  modifications, epigenetic regulation of transcription and can themselves act as signaling molecules. However, given their short lifespan, technical challenges,  and  historic  misconception  of  their  simplicity,  the  role

This article is part of a series of reviews covering Neutrophils and Friends appearing in Volume 314 of Immunological Reviews .

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

© 2022 The Authors. Immunological Reviews published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.

|

of metabolism in defining neutrophil function is only recently gaining interest. This review will outline the major metabolic pathways employed by neutrophils, summarize the role of the mitochondria in neutrophil function, and explore how altered neutrophil metabolism contributes to disease.

## 2   PECULIARITIES OF NEUTROPHIL | METABOLISM

Mammalian cells derive energy from 3 key sources: carbohydrate, protein, and fats (Figure 1). The breakdown of these substrates ultimately leads to the generation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the cellular  energy  currency.  Protein  and  fats  enter  the  mitochondrial tricarboxylic  acid  cycle  (TCA)  and  electron  transport  chain  during catabolism in a process that is oxygen dependent. The breakdown of  the  key  carbohydrate  glucose  also  requires  mitochondrial  oxygenation for complete efficiency. However, in contrast to other substrates, ATP can nevertheless be generated by glycolysis in oxygen deplete environments. Oxygen exists in arterial blood at 10-  12 kPa, reducing to 4-  5 and 2 kPa in venous blood and skin, respectively, although the precise availability is tissue-  dependent. During inflammation, factors such as edema, microthrombi, and reactive oxygen species  contribute  to  the  development  of  localized  hypoxia  and

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

.

nutrient insufficiency. In addition, recruitment of metabolically active cells increases oxygen consumption with oxygen availability at inflammatory sites estimated to be &lt; 1 kPa.  Neutrophils, therefore, 1 not  only  contribute  to  this  hostile  environment  but  must  be  sufficiently  resilient  to  function  within  it. 2 Consequently, neutrophils possess the metabolic adaptations to utilize glycolysis to supply over 90% of their ATP, irrespective of oxygen availability, a response augmented by activation of the transcription factor hypoxia-  inducible factor  (HIF).  Although  less  efficient  that  oxidative  metabolism  (in terms of absolute amount of ATP produced per molecule of glucose), this glycolytic phenotype ensures ongoing access to ATP, independent  of  oxygen  availability.  It  also  allows  rapid  access  to  ATP,  enabling neutrophils to meet the sudden increase in energy demands required  for  effective  antimicrobial  defense  including  chemotaxis, degranulation, phagocytosis, and respiratory burst activity. 3,4

This  reliance  on  glycolysis  generates  a  further  challenge  for these  resourceful  cells.  Sites  of  inflammation  are  frequently  characterized  by  limited  nutrient  availability,  including  low  glucose levels. 5 Neutrophils have a number of strategies to overcome this challenge.  Firstly,  circulating  human  neutrophils  have  evolved  the ability to rapidly enhance glucose uptake from the extracellular environment following activation of toll-  like receptors (TLRs) through enhanced translocation of glucose transporters to the cell surface. 6 Neutrophils also have the capacity to store glucose in the form of

FIGURE 1 Neutrophils are predominantly glycolytic but can alter their metabolic program in response to environmental signals, energetic demands, and nutrient availability. Glucose transport is upregulated in response to TLR activation and HIF signaling (depicted in green). Glutamine and fatty acids can both be utilized to replenish central carbon metabolism (depicted in orange). Glycogen can be both synthesized and broken down as required to provide energy storage when glucose is abundant and substrate when glucose is limited (depicted in red). Following activation with multiple different stimuli, neutrophils reconfigure metabolism to maximize ROS production via a move to a pentose cycle, supported by reverse upper glycolysis (Depicted in blue). G-  1-  P, glucose-  1-  phosphate; G-  6-  P, glucose-  6-  phosphate; F-  6-  P, fructose-  6-  phosphate; FBP, fructose-  1,6-  bisphosphate; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone phosphate; GAP, glyceraldehyde 3-  phosphate, PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate

<!-- image -->

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

glycogen,  which  they  can  utilize  to  fuel  inflammatory  responses when access to extracellular glucose is limited. 7,8 Of interest is the recent  finding  that  both  human  and  murine  neutrophils  possess an  active  gluconeogenic  pathway,  a  process  originally  considered to be confined to hepatocytes.  This provides the neutrophil with 8 the ability to use non-  glucose substrates to form both glucose and glycogen and is now known to play an important part in fueling effective neutrophil responses in the tissues, 5,8 opening new avenues for exploration of neutrophil biology. In dendritic cells, glucose and glycogen-  derived  carbons  have  been  shown  to  contribute  to  distinct metabolic pathways with consequences for cellular functions. 9 Whether neutrophils exhibit similar functional segregation of carbons,  depending  on  their  metabolite  source,  remains  unknown. There is early evidence that glucose compartmentalization can regulate neutrophil function: Patients with glycogen storage disease type Ib lack the glucose-  6-  phosphate transporter, and thus, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) cycling of glucose fails to take place. As a result, glucose uptake is diminished, which simultaneously impairs glucose utilization and promotes both ER and mitochondrial oxidative stress, ultimately  regulating  neutrophil  survival. 10 For  inflammatory  neutrophils, the capacity to switch between these metabolic programs provides these cells with an armory of metabolic responses which they can engage to sustain biosynthetic activity when oxygen and nutrients are limited.

Glucose not only contributes to neutrophil energy homeostasis but  plays  an  essential  role  in  antimicrobial  responses  against  certain  pathogens. 11 Diversion  of  glucose-  6-  phosphate  through  the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) is essential for NADPH generation which reduces oxygen to form reactive oxygen species (ROS) through the NADPH oxidase (NOX) system. Interesting recent work  has  demonstrated  that  human  and  murine  neutrophils  rapidly enhance NADPH production when demand is present through generation of a pentose cycle and reverse upper glycolysis. 12 One glucose  molecule  therefore  contributes  up  to  six  NADPH,  as  opposed to two through the canonical PPP, permitting rapid activation of  the  cell's  effector  functions.  ROS  generation through NOX is a cornerstone of an effective neutrophil response, as highlighted by the infectious disease burden in patients with chronic granulomatous disease who lack NOX activity. 13 ROS ultimately leads to hypochlorous acid generation which is one element of the antimicrobial arsenal. 14 However, ROS and therefore NOX and NADPH also play diverse roles in the regulation of neutrophil activity through intracellular signaling. This can occur through modification of the redox state of target proteins or lipids 15 and  can  regulate key processes such as chemotaxis through modulation of phosphatase activity in studies of murine bone marrow neutrophils. 16 Finally, while increasing  complexity  has  been  appreciated  in  the  formation  of  NETs  to a  diverse  range of stimuli, glucose utilization is central to phorbol 12-  Myristate 13-  Acetate (PMA)-  induced NET formation: While glycolysis is necessary for fueling PMA-  induced NET formation, 17 the PPP appears to be essential for the ROS which ultimately determines the decision to form NETs in human peripheral blood neutrophils. 18 The PPP may then not only fuel oxidative antimicrobial responses

but play an important role in intracellular ROS signaling and instruction of neutrophil fate.

## 3   NEUTROPHIL MITOCHONDRIAL | METABOLISM

Despite their reliance on glycolysis over oxidative respiration, neutrophils do contain mitochondria. The role of the neutrophil mitochondria is somewhat controversial and although there is a long-  held view that their key role is in the regulation of apoptosis, 19 increasing evidence has demonstrated an important role in coordinating neutrophil metabolic responses (Figure 2). Indeed, although neutrophil mitochondria  are  morphologically  indistinct  in  comparison  with other cells they do, nevertheless, possess a membrane potential. 19 Interestingly, this membrane potential appears to be uncoupled from ADP phosphorylation, at least in quiescent human neutrophils. 20

To what extent, and for what purpose, neutrophils utilize mitochondrial metabolism therefore remains an open question. In this regard,  tissue  nutrient  availability  is  an  important  consideration. The enzymes of the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation are important regulators of terminally differentiated neutrophil function and survival. Succinate dehydrogenase B (SDH) oxidizes succinate to fumarate in the TCA cycle while also functioning as complex II in the electron transport chain. In neutrophils from patients with reduced SDH activity, SDH activity was shown to play an important role in neutrophil  survival,  a  result  replicated  with  chemical  inhibition. 21 Similarly, through interrogation of mitochondrial complex I by rotenone, a role for electron transport chain activity has been identified in  LPS-  mediated  neutrophil  activation  and  tissue  injury  in  murine models, although this effect was independent of ATP generation. 22

The  role  for  specific  substrates  in  sustaining  neutrophil  TCA, electron  transport  chain  activity  and  the  instruction  of  neutrophil  function  remains  relatively  scantly  investigated.  Neutrophils have  been  demonstrated  to  utilize  the  mitochondrial  oxidation  of glycerol-  3-  phosphate (G3P) in a so-  called G3P shuttle to maintain mitochondrial membrane potential. This G3P shuttle provides electrons to complex III and appears to play an important role in regenerating  NAD + for  continuing  glycolysis, 20 and  therefore,  even  for glycolytic  metabolism,  the  neutrophil  mitochondrion  appears  to play an important role. Moreover, in human blood neutrophils, this shuttle was shown to promote the generation of mitochondrial ROS, which regulated HIF1-   stability and therefore neutrophil survival, α phagocytosis, and protease release. 23

In other cells, the complete oxidation of glucose through the TCA cycle is an important source of ATP. However, little evidence exists to  suggest  that  glucose-  derived  acetyl  CoA  is  an  important  mitochondrial  substrate  in  neutrophils.  Fatty  acid-  derived  acetyl  CoA, which enters the TCA cycle to fuel electron transport chain activity, represents an alternative mitochondrial substrate. In mature neutrophils, a small role for fatty acid oxidation in ATP production in human peripheral blood neutrophils has been demonstrated through inhibition by etomoxir.  However, the importance of this in terminally 8

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

.

FIGURE 2 Although the electron transport chain is dispensable for ATP synthesis in neutrophils, mitochondria remain essential for a wide range of functions. Those which have been shown to be of relevance in neutrophils are highlighted in green. SDHB, succinate dehydrogenase B; G3P, glycerol-  3-  phosphate; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone phosphate; GPDH, glycerol-  3-  phosphate dehydrogenase

<!-- image -->

differentiated neutrophils remains to be fully explored. Fatty acid oxidation likely plays a much greater role in immature neutrophils and in specific neutrophil subsets and is discussed below along with other facets of neutrophil lipid metabolism.

The amino acid glutamine is highly abundant and may contribute both to biosynthetic pathways such as protein synthesis and to catabolic pathways. The breakdown of glutamine through glutaminolysis leads to the formation of alpha-  ketoglutarate which feeds into the TCA cycle. Through heavy carbon labeled experiments, human neutrophils have been shown to metabolize glutamine, 8,24 with the downstream metabolic intermediaries contributing to multiple important  pathways  and  functions:  Glutaminolysis  leads  to  NADPH production, 25 generating substrate for neutrophil NOX and therefore  oxidative  burst.  Furthermore,  glutamine  supports  neutrophil NET formation in response to PMA which is known to be dependent on ROS. 17,26 Interestingly, &lt; 1% of glutamine used by inflammatory peritoneal rat neutrophils becomes fully oxidized, 27 suggesting additional roles for glutamine beyond ROS production. In this regard, glutamine is  an  important  substrate  for  biosynthetic  reactions  including that of glutathione and nucleotide synthesis. However, an

in-  depth  interrogation  of  these  pathways  has  yet  to  take  place  in neutrophils. Glutamine has been shown to support neutrophil central  carbon  metabolism 5,8 particularly  in  conditions  of  nutritional stress. Moreover, this supports a hyperinflammatory phenotype in murine lung neutrophils. Of considerable interest is the observation that glutamine also supports neutrophil gluconeogenesis, which ultimately leads to the de novo formation of glycogen.  Glycogenolysis 8 of newly formed glycogen via a glycogen shunt has been shown to have  specific  roles  in  early  metabolic  reprogramming  during  dendritic cell activation. Human blood neutrophils have been shown to utilize different sources of glucose for different functions, with chemotaxis preferentially utilizing glucose taken up from the extracellular environment while phagocytosis utilizes glycogenolysis. 28

As our understanding of the complexity and heterogeneity of the neutrophil population expands, it has become clear that metabolic programs also vary with the stage of neutrophil differentiation. Specifically, while glycolysis is the principal energy source in mature neutrophils, oxidative metabolism appears to play a greater role in immature neutrophils. One source of substrate for oxidative  metabolism  is  via  autophagy,  where  cytosolic  components

1600065x, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/imr.13157 by UNB - Universidade de Brasilia, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

become enclosed in double-  membraned vesicles termed autophagosomes.  Through  recruitment  of  lysosomes,  cellular  elements are  recycled,  clearing  damaged  components  and  providing  an energetic source. During differentiation, a progressive shift from oxidative  phosphorylation  to  glycolysis  occurs,  with  generation of fatty acids by autophagy of lipid droplets critical to immature neutrophil energy status and progression of differentiation in the mouse bone marrow compartment. 29  In the absence of lipolysis, provision of pyruvate or free fatty acids restored energy reserves and differentiation,  demonstrating the importance of mitochondrial ATP provision from fatty acid oxidation to immature neutrophil development.

Beyond  cellular  energetics,  ATP  via  purinergic  signaling  has emerged as an important regulator of neutrophil function. Although in the mature neutrophil, mitochondrial ATP provision is low, it has an interesting role in the regulation of chemotaxis in human and murine neutrophils. During chemotaxis, ATP is released at the leading edge and signals via purinergic receptors in an autocrine manner. 30 Studies  of  human  neutrophils  have  demonstrated  that  collapse  of neutrophil  mitochondrial  membrane  potential  by  FCCP  inhibited chemotaxis  (although  did  not  alter  respiratory  burst  or  phagocytosis). 31 Furthermore, it was demonstrated that mitochondria were responsible for the provision of the ATP, via mTOR signaling, in response to the chemoattractant fMLP in human neutrophils. Finally, defective  chemotaxis  has  been  observed  in  inflammatory  neutrophils of mice lacking purinergic receptors. 32 The cellular source of ATP is therefore important in regulating cellular activity and even a small ATP contribution may have a significant impact on inflammatory outcomes.

Electron  transport  chain  activity  in  the  mitochondrion,  particularly complex III, also leads to the generation of mitochondrial ROS (mROS). 33 mROS plays several important roles in the cell. For example, in macrophages, a loss of uncoupling protein 2 increased mROS production and led to more efficient elimination of the protozoa Toxoplasma gondii through MAPK activation. 34,35 Additionally, accumulation of mROS was important for the initiation of autophagy during starvation in cell lines, 36 which may be especially pertinent to the neutrophil's biosynthetic response to nutrient-  deprived sites. 5 The role of ROS in NET formation has also gathered considerable interest with several pathways now described from diverse stimuli. In NADPH-  independent NETosis, of human blood neutrophils, mROS was necessary. 37,38 The substrates and metabolic switches that ultimately guide mROS formation during neutrophil responses require further exploration.

Finally, not only do mitochondria play a role in regulating chromosomal  DNA  expulsion  during  NET  formation,  they  can  also form NETs themselves through the release of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from live human blood neutrophils. 39 NETs composed of mtDNA were detected in patients following trauma, 40 although their role remains unclear as they lack histones, considered to be key in the antimicrobial activity of NETs. mtDNA in this context may instead play a role in precipitating the inflammatory response through activation of inflammatory pathways. 41 Given their relatively short

lifespan and low reliance on mitochondrial ATP, the neutrophil may be uniquely placed to expulse mitochondria for such purposes.

## 4   LIPID METABOLISM: CELLULAR | ENERGETICS TO SIGNALING MOLECULES

Beyond  their  role  in  cellular  energetics,  lipids  are  also  important for multiple cellular functions. Lipids constitute a large and diverse class of biomolecules, reflected in the multitude of roles they play in the cell 42 (Figure 2).{Fahy, 2011 #1} They can be classed into five major subcategories: free fatty acyls (eg palmitic acid and oleic acid), glycerolipids  (eg  triacylglycerols),  glycerophospholipids  (eg  phosphatidylcholine,  phosphatidylserine),  sterol  lipids  (eg  cholesterol), and sphingolipids (eg sphingomyelin). Fatty acids can be stored in the form of triacylglycerols in lipid droplets. Triacylglycerols (TG) can then be broken down by lipolysis and the resulting fatty acids can enter beta-  oxidation to contribute to both ATP generation and reducing power, in the form of NADPH. Glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids,  and  sterols  primarily  serve  as  building  blocks  for  cellular and organelle membranes. 43 In addition, precursors of bioactive lipid mediators known as polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) are released from membrane phospholipids in response to cytokines during early phases  of  inflammation  and  infection.  Arachidonic  acid  (AA)  is  a common endogenous precursor released from membrane phospholipids by cytosolic phospholipase A2 and transformed into numerous potent bioactive eicosanoids: prostaglandins, leukotrienes (LT), and lipoxins. 44

It  is  widely appreciated that such lipid mediators play a critical role  in  initiating  leukocyte  migration  required  for  host  defense. 45 Leukotrienes  and  prostaglandins  are  the  main  eicosanoids  produced  following  neutrophil  activation  and  result  in  the  induction of  the  acute  inflammatory  response.  AA  is  converted  to  prostaglandin H  (PGH ) by cyclo-  oxygenase 2 and is further metabolized 2 2 into  active  prostaglandin  E 2 (PGE ). 2 46 Human  neutrophils  express high  levels  of  5-  lipoxygenase,  the  enzyme  catalyzing  the  conversion of arachidonic acid to 5-  hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid (5HPETE) and leukotriene A  (LTA ). 4 4 47 On stimulation, 5-  lipoxygenase translocates  to  the  nuclear  membrane  where  it  co-  localizes  with 5-  lipoxygenase-  activating protein and cytosolic phospholipase A2, allowing efficient leukotriene production. LTA  is converted to leu4 kotriene B  (LTB ) by LTA  hydrolase. 4 4 4 48 LTB 4 is  a  potent  chemoattractant of neutrophils, as well as inducing adhesion to endothelial cells, degranulation, and superoxide production. 49-  51 The formation of  leukotrienes  is  dependent  on  the  endogenous  and  exogenous arachidonic acid pools. Endogenous AA is preferentially converted into LTB  whereas exogenous AA contributes to LTA  for export. 4 4 52 Importantly, the proinflammatory lipid mediators PGE  and PGI  con2 2 tribute to progression from acute to chronic inflammation in a murine model of collagen-  induced arthritis. 53 Furthermore, redundancy is noted within this system between the multiple prostaglandin receptor types and subtypes. Lipid droplets serve as major organelles for  the  generation  of  AA-  derived  eicosanoids. 54 Triacylglycerols

constitute the major lipid class of the neutrophil lipid droplet core, 55 and resting human neutrophils have been shown to contain a high proportion of triacylglycerols in comparison with CD14 + monocytes and  CD4   T  cells. + 56 Adipose  triglyceride  lipase  (ATGL),  which  degrades  triacylglycerols,  directly  regulates  substrate  availability  for proinflammatory lipid mediator synthesis. In humans, mutations in ATGL lead to Jordan's anomaly, characterized by TG accumulation in many cells and tissues, including in circulating leukocytes. Studies in  mice  lacking  ATGL  in  the  myeloid  compartment  demonstrated that loss of ATGL in neutrophils results in reduced release of lipid mediators during an inflammatory response but also enhanced chemotaxis and some evidence of increased activation, highlighting the pleiotropic effects of lipid mediators. 57 Interestingly, human neutrophils have been shown to take up high levels of fatty acids which, rather than undergoing oxidation (as was observed in lymphocytes), are incorporated into newly synthesized TG. 58 These triglycerides are thought to act as a source of not just lipid mediators, but also fatty acid for phosphatidylcholine synthesis during phagocytosis. 59 In keeping with this, LPS-  stimulated neutrophils have elevated levels of TG with increased amounts of palmitic acid. 60 A recent study by our  group  supported  these  findings  of  increased  fatty  acid  transport into neutrophils and high levels of palmitic acid entering into beta-  oxidation. 8

Alterations in lipid content have been linked to the regulation of human neutrophil function and survival. Both cholesterol depletion and sphingomyelin degradation result in increased NET formation. 61 The membranes of LPS-  stimulated neutrophils have been shown to display  increased  fluidity  measured  by  the  cholesterol:  phospholipid ratio. 60 Lipid rafts have important biological functions related to membrane signaling and protein trafficking. Both cholesterol and sphingomyelin are involved in the formation of these highly ordered and tightly packed membrane microdomains 62 which have been reported to play a role in neutrophil migration. 63

Neutrophil apoptosis is  preceded  by  the  de  novo  synthesis  of the bioactive sphingolipid ceramide. The accumulation of endogenous 16- and 24-  carbon atom ceramides which are not derived from sphingomyelin partially contributes to spontaneous human neutrophil apoptosis through the activation of caspases. 64 These studies demonstrate a correlation between lipid abundance and neutrophil survival and function. However, further work is required to delineate  the  exact  metabolic  processes  involved  in  the  generation  of these lipids, and the mechanisms by which alterations in their abundance might impact upon cell membrane fluidity and lipid mediator availability.

A  link  between  phospholipid  metabolism  and  neutrophil  inner mitochondrial membrane integrity is well established. The phospholipid cardiolipin is almost exclusively found in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Tafazzin (TAZ) is an enzyme which processes the final step of cardiolipin maturation, replacing saturated with unsaturated acyl chains. Inherited mutations in the TAZ gene result in defects in cardiolipin synthesis and contribute to a disorganized inner mitochondrial membrane resulting in Barth syndrome. 65 Barth syndrome is characterized by cardiomyopathy, skeletal muscle myopathy, and

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

.

neutropenia. Although data suggest that the neutropenia is caused by an increased propensity for apoptosis as a result of ER stress, 66 how inherited mutations in TAZ increase sensitivity to ER stress remains unknown. Cardiolipin is known to be critical in the stabilization of protein complexes such as the electron transfer chain I, III, and IV, as well as ATP synthase which ensures electron transfer chain efficiency. 67 Changes in neutrophil membrane bilayer organization may result in destabilization of enzymes or enzyme complexes involved in energy production and may, in turn, result in generation of mROS but this has not yet been shown definitively.

These studies demonstrate that lipid mediators act as key neutrophil  signaling  molecules,  required  for  effective  migration,  recruitment, and phagocytosis (Figure 3), although often the specific molecular  mechanisms  involved  remain  poorly  defined.  The  functions of membrane lipids which are not related to biologically active eicosanoids remain unknown. Areas for future research include investigation of how the cellular lipidome is regulated to sustain neutrophil function and survival, as well as how the organization and compartmentalization of lipids in the phospholipid bilayer relates to key neutrophil effector functions.

## 5   ONE CARBON METABOLISM, | BIOSYNTHESIS, AND ANTIOXIDANT DEFENSE

Cell survival requires the flexibility to synthesize a multitude of molecules to meet demand as and when required. A key biosynthetic pathway  is  the  one-  carbon  (1C)  metabolism  pathway,  centered around  the  metabolism  of  folate.  Specifically,  multiple  sources  of carbon including  serine,  glycine,  and  histidine  feed  into  the  interlinked  folate  and  methionine  cycles  which  transfers  one  carbon units  to  new  molecules  and  ultimately  leads  to  the  formation  of purines, pyrimidines, amino acids, and phospholipids. Additionally, the methylation or transfer of 1C units to DNA leads to modification of gene expression and therefore regulation of cellular function. Unsurprisingly, the focus for 1C metabolism has been in proliferating tissues with particular interest in development, hematopoiesis and in cancer cells. Indeed, inhibition of folate metabolism by methotrexate is an established therapeutic option in both cancer and immunemediated  disease.  More  diverse  roles  for  the  regulation  of  T-  cell responses have been identified, where 1C metabolism regulated the formation  of  purines  and  thymidine,  permitting  proliferation  and naïve  T-  cell  function.  This  response  was  mitochondria  dependent and appeared to protect cells from DNA damage. 68 Given the intrinsic link between 1C metabolism and proliferation, comparatively little attention has been directed toward the cycle's role in neutrophils.

However, this pathway has diverse roles in the cell which merit further  consideration.  Neutrophils  are  more  biosynthetically  active than was previously considered, and modify their metabolism based on their environment and needs to support this.  While neu5 trophils have an active oxidative PPP to generate NADPH, they are terminally differentiated cells and therefore little consideration has

M

Immunological Reviews

O

R

I

S

O

N

FIGURE 3 Lipids and their metabolites constitute a diverse group of mediators with equally diverse effects on neutrophil phenotype and function. Through both catabolic and anabolic programs, neutrophils can drive ATP synthesis, generate reducing power, synthesize downstream mediators such as eicosanoids, build cellular membrane components, cause NETosis and apoptosis and facilitate neutrophil migration. FFA, free fatty acids; AA, arachidonic acid; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acids

<!-- image -->

been given to their need for ongoing nucleotide synthesis and the role  non-  oxidative  PPP  in  this.  With  evidence  that  redox  balance regulates serine biosynthesis and the 1C pathway in cancer, much remains to be explored in the context of neutrophil anabolic reactions. 69 It is interesting to consider to what extent a neutrophil requires new nucleotides and one could speculate that they may have a role in nucleotide salvage or mitochondrial biogenesis. Additionally, NET  formation  employs  active  DNA  repair  mechanisms 70 which utilize  the  pentose  phosphate  pathway  in  other  cell  types. 71 It will  be  interesting to examine the role that these previously overlooked biosynthetic pathways have in neutrophil homeostasis and in neutrophil-  mediated host defense and illness.

While the oxPPP is considered the dominant source of NADPH, an almost comparable role for folate metabolism was identified in a cell line model. 72 Given the importance of NADPH to neutrophil ROS formation and pathogen killing, it is intriguing to consider to what extent 1C metabolism contributes to neutrophil antimicrobial

responses. Moreover, in nutrient deplete conditions, the mitochondrial 1C pathway has been shown to be necessary for the de novo synthesis of glutathione and therefore essential in maintaining cellular redox balance. 73 In murine neutrophils, the ability to form reduced glutathione was necessary to sustain the oxidative burst and antimicrobial killing. 74 Moreover, depletion of glutathione has been suggested to be an important step in mouse bone marrow neutrophil apoptosis. 75

The nuclear factor erythroid 2-  related factor 2 (Nrf2) is another important  defense  against  redox  stress.  NRF2  is  constitutively expressed  transcription  factor  but  targeted  for  proteasomal  degradation by Kelch-  Like ECH-  associated protein 1 (KEAP1) under homeostatic conditions. During oxidative stress, KEAP1 is inactivated leading to NRF2 accumulation and its translocation to the nucleus where it regulates genes that are protective against oxidative stress including those involved in glutathione synthesis and heme oxygenase 1 (HO-  1). 76 It also suppresses transcription of proinflammatory

genes, for example IL-  1 β and therefore controls tissue injury during inflammation. 77 Recent interesting work has demonstrated a role for NRF2 in orchestrating macrophage metabolism following an inflammatory stimulus, with NRF2 a core regulator of lipid and glutathione metabolism as well as promoting mitochondrial fusion. 78 Out-  with the ability of NRF2 to regulate neutrophil cytokine production and migration 79,80 it will therefore be important to consider how neutrophils meet both their biosynthetic and anti-  oxidant needs through co-  ordinated responses in 1C metabolism and NRF2 signaling.

## 6   NUTRIENT-  SENSING KINASES: MTOR | AND AMPK

The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is highly conserved between species and has been demonstrated to have an important role in cell growth, cancer, and immunity, including in the neutrophil  inflammatory  response. 81 The  mTOR  pathway  acts  as an integrator of cellular nutritional status and metabolic behavior. mTOR itself is a serine/threonine protein kinase which forms two distinct signaling complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2 (incorporating Raptor and Rictor, respectively). 81 These complexes integrate multiple inputs to regulate anabolic and catabolic processes. For example, energetic stress following glucose deprivation results in increased AMP, activation of AMP-  activated protein kinase (AMPK), phosphorylation of Raptor and inhibition of downstream mTORC1 signaling. In contrast, amino acids confer an anabolic signal to the cell by inhibiting  upstream  inhibition  of  mTORC1  by  GATOR.  This  permits mTORC1 to  activate  downstream  targets  including  S6K  by  phosphorylation. The downstream effects of mTORC1 signaling include the positive regulation of mRNA translation, lipid synthesis, glucose utilization,  and  inhibition  of  autophagy. 82 Additionally,  mTORC1 plays a role in nucleotide synthesis by upregulation of methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase/cyclohydrolase (MTHFD2) via one carbon metabolism. 83 In contrast, mTORC2 regulates the response to extracellular cues, particularly insulin. Here, the insulin receptor leads to PI3K activation and the generation of PIP3 which relieves mTORC2 autoinhibition by its mSin1 subunit. The downstream signaling consequences of mTORC2 are distinct from mTORC1 and include  the  activation  of  Akt  which  phosphorylates  and  negatively regulates the transcription factor FoxO1/3a, excluding it from the nucleus to  regulate  its  downstream  targets  including  enzymes  involved  in  glucose  and  glycogen  metabolism. 81 Through  regulation of PKC, mTORC2 also regulates cytoskeletal remodeling, migration and through FoxO1/3a, signaling inhibits apoptosis and drives cell cycle progression. Finally, there is a cross talk between mTORC1 and HIF-  1 α where mTORC1 enhances HIF-  1 α translation and therefore glycolytic  behavior. 84 Thus,  the  AMPK/mTOR pathway assimilates the nutritional status of the cell to regulate metabolism, growth, survival, and division (Figure 4).

While much is known of the importance of mTOR signaling in immune  cell  survival  and  function  in  general,  less  is  understood of its role in neutrophils. However, an important role in regulating

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

.

neutrophilic  inflammation  upon  entry  to  nutritionally  challenging sites has recently emerged. In a murine lung injury model, reduced access to glucose and oxygen led to suppressed mTORC1 activity in neutrophils. 5 In doing so, neutrophils enhanced lysosomal catabolism  of  extracellular  protein,  as  had  been  previously  observed  in cancer cell lines, 85 and ultimately contributed to enhanced sickness outcomes.

Cellular  nutritional  status  is  also  regulated  in  part  by  the  peroxisome proliferator-  activated receptor (PPAR) pathway (Figure 4). Three  of  these  ligand-  inducible  transcription  factors  have  been identified: PPAR ,  PPAR / ,  and  PPARY .  These  have  distinct α β δ γ and overlapping tissue distribution  and  ligand  specificity.  Broadly, however,  they  behave  similarly  as  promiscuous  receptors  binding a  range  of  lipid-  derived  ligands  to  regulate  energy  homeostasis. 86 For example, PPAR α is activated upon fatty acid binding, while the repertoire  of  PPAR γ includes  the  eicosanoids.  Ligand  binding  releases co-  repressors from PPAR, recruits co-  activators, and allows heterodimerization with retinoid X receptor (RXR) which then binds to  peroxisome  proliferator  hormone  response  elements  (PPRE)  to begin transcription of genes included in lipid and glucose metabolism as well as promoting cell cycle arrest. 87 The ability of PPAR to promote fatty acid and glucose oxidation and insulin sensitization has also led to the use of the therapeutic agonists, thiazolidinediones in the management of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. 88 Beyond regulating the cellular response to lipids, the PPARs have emerged  as  important  regulators  of  the  inflammatory  response. Treatment of macrophages with PPAR  agonists suppressed TNFγ α production while PPAR α inhibited transcription of Nf-  B targets. κ 89 Moreover, PPAR has been shown to promote the formation of proresolution  M2  macrophages  and  attenuated  the  proinflammatory response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis while enhancing autophagic machinery, lipid catabolism and ultimately increasing M. tuberculosis killing. 90 Similarly, administration of PPAR agonists favors an M2, pro-  resolving macrophage phenotype and attenuating tissue injury in  immune-  mediated  liver  and  kidney  inflammation. 91 Lipid  availability and signaling through the PPAR pathway therefore plays an important role in regulating cellular metabolism and modulating inflammatory and antimicrobial responses.

Neutrophils  have  also  been  demonstrated  to  be  regulated  by the  PPAR  family.  In  a  guinea  pig  model  of  acute  LPS-  induced  airway inflammation, treatment with the PPAR  agonist pioglitazone γ improved airway function and reduced neutrophil numbers in the airway. 92 In  patients  with  sepsis,  PPAR γ expression was increased and was responsible for impaired chemotaxis which was rescued by PPAR inhibition in vivo. 93 PPAR γ activation with Rosiglitazone was found to polarize infiltrating neutrophils in a mouse model of ischemic  stroke  with  a  favorable  effect  on  inflammation  resolution. 94 PPAR  has also gathered attention given its role in the promotion of γ cellular apoptosis and ability to reduce neutrophil number although its precise role in neutrophil apoptosis remains unclear and is likely ligand-  specific. 95 There  therefore  remains  a  need  to  further  characterize the effect of lipid sensing on the neutrophil transcriptional program and inflammatory outcomes.

M

|

FIGURE 4 Nutrient-  sensing pathways integrate a multitude of intra- and extracellular signals in order to drive anabolic and catabolic pathways as appropriate to maintain homeostasis

<!-- image -->

O

R

I

S

O

N

1600065x, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/imr.13157 by UNB - Universidade de Brasilia, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

<!-- image -->

## 7   TRAINING THE NEUTROPHIL | RESPONSE

Historically, the immune system has been broadly divided into cells of  the  innate  and  adaptive systems with a defining feature of the latter being memory for previous insults. Recent observations have challenged the dogma that cells of the innate immune system fail to mount adaptive responses. For example, enhancement of mononuclear phagocyte responses has been demonstrated following infection 96 or vaccination 97 and has led to the term trained immunity being  coined.  Initially  described  in  plants, 98 this  phenomenon  differs  from  classic  immunological  memory  in  that  it  is  non-  specific, no gene rearrangement occurs and antigen-  specific clones are not generated. 99 Instead, central imprinting of hematopoietic stem cells has  been  implicated  in  such  responses  in  mammals. 100 Moreover, in  T-  cell  and  monocyte  populations  alterations  in  the  epigenetic landscape are also described at sites of action and within the bone marrow compartment. These changes have been linked to the availability  of  metabolic  intermediaries  with  known  links  to  oxygensensing responses exemplified by S-  2-  hydroxyglutarate, acetyl-  CoA, and fumarate. 101-  103

Less  is  known  of  such  rewiring  responses  in  neutrophils  but nevertheless,  persistent  modification  in  their  behavior  following challenge has been described. Our group has demonstrated that, although systemic hypoxia exacerbated neutrophil-  mediated host injury in a murine model of acute pneumonia, prior exposure of animals to hypoxia was protective. 104 Consistent with such findings in other immune cells, rewiring of cellular metabolism was key. Specifically, modulation  of  neutrophil  glycolysis  conferred  host  protection  to damaging neutrophil responses and was regulated by the oxygensensing HIF1 pathway 104 as has been shown in other leucocytes. 105 There is increasing evidence to support a role for training in neutrophil responses. Prior hypoxic exposure has also been demonstrated to be protective in the context of rat models of gut ischemic/reperfusion injury, where the cytokine TNF-   primed neutrophils to mainα tain epithelial integrity. 106,107 Recently published data challenge the dogma that nuanced and trained neutrophil responses do not occur. A role for altered chromatin assembly and nucleosome positioning has been demonstrated in defining inflammatory neutrophil subsets in the blood of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus 108 and in  determining the altered fate and phenotype of neutrophils isolated from different mouse tissues. 109 Interestingly, when exposed to beta-  glucan, a known inducer of trained immunity, murine neutrophils adopted an altered epigenome with modulation of their reactive oxygen metabolism which ultimately defined their antitumor response. 110 With  new  evidence  that  maladaptive  innate  immune training and hypoxic lung inflammation are in part consequent upon altered bone marrow myelopoiesis 111,112 the potential that epigenetic programs can sustain reprogramming of neutrophil physiological responses within both the tissues and bone marrow compartment is an exciting possibility. How metabolic pathways could regulate these epigenetic programs remains speculative but, with JmjC-  containing histone  demethylases  and  ten-  eleven  translocation  (TET)  DNA

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

.

demethylases requiring both oxygen and 2-  oxoglutarate for enzymatic function, 113 a role for metabolism in the regulation of epigenetic modifications is likely.

## 8   NEUTROPHIL METABOLISM IN | DISEASE

Not only are  neutrophils  essential  for  host  pathogen  defense  but when they become dysregulated, they can contribute to significant host injury and illness. With the expanding knowledge base linking metabolic  process  with  cellular  function,  attention  is  increasingly focussed on neutrophil metabolism and host outcomes in different disease states. Work over the last decade has expanded our understanding of neutrophil metabolism in disease including in respiratory disease, diabetes mellitus, and cancer.

## 8.1    Inflammatory lung disease |

One of the greatest therapeutic challenges for treating tissue damage caused by neutrophilic inflammation remains how to selectively target dysfunctional neutrophilic inflammation while preserving key immune effector functions. Murine models of hypoxic acute lung injury have revealed that, in the tissues, neutrophils have the capacity to scavenge extracellular proteins to fuel central carbon metabolism and sustain de novo protein synthesis in the lung. Thus, they can adapt to the protein-  rich,  glucose-  deprived  environments  pathognomonic of acute lung injury, a process regulated in part by activation of the lysosomal compartment and concurrent suppression of mTORC1. 5  This capacity for tissue injury is further augmented by the ability of neutrophils to regulate glycogen stores. Activation of hypoxia signaling pathways consequent upon genetic loss or pharmacological inhibition of the dominant prolyl hydroxylase domaincontaining enzyme, PhD2, result in a glycolysis-  dependent increase in  neutrophil persistence in the lung and associated lung injury in mice.  These hyperinflammatory, glycolysis-  fueled neutrophils ulti7 mately result in host-  mediated morbidity and mortality, independent  of  the  pathogenicity  of  the  bacterial  or  viral  challenge. 104,112 In human disease, metabolic perturbations in the tissue neutrophil compartment have yet to be defined, although intrinsic reprogramming  of  core  metabolic  programs  is  observed  within  the  circulating neutrophil compartment of patients with COVID-  19-  associated ARDS. 114 An  observed increase in intracellular glutamate levels in blood neutrophils raises the intriguing possibility that neutrophil capacity for substrate switching is pre-  determined, in advance of their recruitment into the tissues. In marked contrast to energy-  rich acute lung inflammation, chronic inflammatory lung diseases (typified by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]) are associated with a failure of neutrophils to maintain energy stores secondary to impaired glycogen synthesis.  Thus, the balance between supply and 8 demand would appear crucial in defining inflammation outcomes in acute and chronic inflammatory disease states.

1600065x, 2023, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/imr.13157 by UNB - Universidade de Brasilia, Wiley Online Library on [06/04/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

## 8.2    The neutrophil in diabetes mellitus |

Patients  with  diabetes  mellitus  have  reduced  quantities  of,  or  response to insulin. As a result, among a range of metabolic perturbations,  they  have  variable  levels  of  hyperglycemia.  This  leads  to neutrophil dysfunction with patients suffering from both impaired pathogen responses and systemic inflammation. It is peculiar that, despite being predominantly glycolytic, neutrophils in the context of hyperglycemia have been shown to have reduced rates of glycolysis in both animal models and patients. 115,116 Moreover, they have reduced flux into and through the pentose phosphate pathway and ultimately have reduced NADPH as a result. 115 Neutrophils may instead accumulate carbohydrate through the sorbitol pathway 117-  120 which, through the action of aldose reductase, consumes NADPH. Moreover, hyperglycemia leads to impaired human neutrophil glutathione  production  and  therefore  enhances  oxidative  stress. 120 Together, these effects result in reduced substrate for NOX and impairment of the antimicrobial response.

The  reduction  of  glucose  utilization  also  raises  the  possibility that  neutrophils  may  be  paradoxically  energetically  compromised in  the  context of diabetes. Indeed, inflammatory neutrophils from a diabetic rat model had reduced ATP content and depolarized mitochondria  which  were  associated  with  a  failure  of  autophagy. 121 Mitochondrial  dysfunction  is  a  feature  of  diabetes  mellitus  more broadly,  particularly  in  type  2  diabetes  where  there  may  be  a  reduction in oxidative phosphorylation and loss of mitochondrial plasticity. 122 It may be challenging to draw parallels between cells that are classically insulin response such as muscle or adipose and those that  are  not.  However,  in  lymphocytes  from  patients  with  type  2 diabetes mellitus where insulin regulates glucose uptake and function, 123 mitochondrial dysfunction has been observed. 124 In addition, while neutrophils are not insulin responsive in the classical sense, a  reduction  in  complex  1  activity  has  been  shown  in  the  neutrophils of patients with type 2 diabetes. 125 In an STZ-  induced mouse model of diabetes, kidney cells demonstrated reduced superoxide production and mitochondrial number, despite increased D17 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions-  a biomarker of cellular stress. 126 Derangement of mitochondrial function impairs the ability of cells to  use  substrates  effectively  and  to  switch  between  substrate  as fasting state necessitates, leading to incomplete fatty acid oxidation and accumulation of intracellular lipid that may exacerbate insulin resistance. 122 Of interest, this mitochondrial stress and DNA damage leads to the release of mtDNA, activation of intracellular DNA signaling pathways, and the promotion of inflammatory responses via DAMP signaling, further contributing to insulin resistance. 127

The paradoxical energy impairment of neutrophil in diabetes 121 raises  interesting  questions  as  to  the  metabolic  response  and  the effect  of  this.  In  radioactive  decarboxylation  studies,  diabetic  rat neutrophils had greater 14 CO 2 production when cultured with 14 Cpalmitate suggesting they performed more fatty acid oxidation. 115 This  raises  the  intriguing  possibility  that  neutrophils  enhance  oxidative  metabolism  to  compensate  for  a  reduction  in  glycolysis. However, why a cell that has adapted to function in a low glucose environment would switch away from glucose when it becomes more

<!-- image -->

freely available remains unknown. Moreover, the consequences of such alterations in mitochondrial metabolism for neutrophil function remain uncertain and is deserving of further study.

## 8.3    Neutrophils in the neoplastic niche |

Beyond sterile and septic inflammation, neutrophil metabolism has also been demonstrated to play a role in cancer outcomes. In particular,  neutrophils of an immature phenotype were shown to use oxidative  metabolism  of  amino  acids  to  support  NET  formation under conditions of glucose deprivation, ultimately leading to metastasis  in  a  mouse  breast  cancer  model. 128 In  the  same  4T1  murine tumor model, adoption of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and NADPH production supported the ROS production necessary to  inhibit  antitumoral  immunity. 129 Finally,  alternative  lipid  use  by myeloid-  derived suppresser cells was found to be oncogenic where fatty  acid  transport  protein  (FATP)2  promoted  lipid  uptake  and prostaglandin E2 synthesis with the suppression of the antitumor immune response. 130 Thus, through metabolic reprogramming, neutrophil function may be regulated with direct consequences for the host. It is also interesting to note that, in the innate immune training of tumor-  bearing mice, granulocyte-  monocyte precursors enrich at a pathway level for transcripts related to oxidative phosphorylation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and mTOR signaling, hinting that metabolic  adaptations  within  myeloid  progenitors  in  the  bone  marrow may in part underlie this trained response. 110 Further complexity is introduced by the heterogeneity of neutrophil populations observed in the setting of cancer. Low density and normal density, mature and immature cells contribute to the circulating pool and different subsets may be recruited to primary versus metastatic tumor sites. It remains to be clarified whether this diversity is in part consequent upon metabolic specialization of these different neutrophil compartments and how this informs pro- or antitumor neutrophil responses. It is, however, reported that these different neutrophil populations have a different propensity to produce ROS and undergo NETosis; thus, a better understanding of the mechanisms which regulate neutrophil metabolism may provide important clues for therapeutic targets in neoplastic disease states.

## 9   SUMMARY |

Neutrophils are a heterogenous population of dynamic effector cells of the innate immune response that have evolved to function in conditions of limited oxygen and nutrient availability. They are metabolically specialized cells, a consequence of their short-  lived nature, and need to rapidly access ATP to mount an effective pathogen response in hostile sites. These adaptions while crucial for pathogen control can be subverted in disease states resulting in a cycle of tissue injury which is self-  sustained and difficult to break. This review highlights the many facets of neutrophil metabolism which contribute to their inflammatory capacity, including the role of mitochondria, despite a dependence on glycolysis and the many aspects of lipid metabolism

FIGURE 5 Neutrophil metabolism is dynamic and flexible. Regulation of metabolic pathways has implications for a multitude of functions including energetics, phagocytosis, redox status, signaling survival, differentiation, and trained immunity. Many important neutrophil functions are consequent upon a combination of these factors, illustrated in green

<!-- image -->

which instruct neutrophilic functions. We also discuss the roles of nutrient-  sensing pathways and 1C metabolism, previously thought to be less relevant to the non-  proliferative neutrophil but now understood to play an important role determining phenotype and function in these cells. Through better understanding of the processes that underpin the metabolic peculiarity of these cells, there is the exciting potential to identify targets that are specific to the neutrophil, retained over time and independent of effects on essential antimicrobial effector functions (Figure 5). In this regard, there remains a significant  knowledge gap in where aberrant neutrophil responses originate  and  how  they  relate  to  changes  in  metabolite  utilization extending well beyond their capacity to generate ATP. This includes but  is  not  limited  to  the  ability  of  metabolic  programs  to  regulate neutrophil apoptosis programs, NETosis, redox balance, membrane turnover,  biosynthetic  programs,  inflammatory  signaling  cascades, epigenetic marks, trained immunity, and developmental programs of both mature neutrophils and their progenitors.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This  work  was  supported  by  Wellcome  Trust  Clinical  Fellowship awards (214383 TM, 224637/Z/21/Z ERW and 098516 and 209220 SRW). For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright license to any author-  accepted manuscript version arising from this submission.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors have no conflict to declare.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

## ORCID

Tyler Morrison https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3432-579X Emily R. Watts https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6496-7366 Pranvera Sadiku https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0275-3159 Sarah R. Walmsley https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9584-174X

<!-- image -->

## REFERENCES

- 1. Niinikoski J, Hunt TK, Dunphy JE. Oxygen supply in healing tissue. Am J Surg . 1972;123(3):247-  252.
- 2. Colgan SP, Taylor CT. Hypoxia: an alarm signal during intestinal inflammation. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol . 2010;7(5):281-  287.
- 3. Fritzenwanger M, Jung C, Goebel B, Lauten A, Figulla HR. Impact of short-  term systemic hypoxia on phagocytosis, cytokine production, and transcription factor activation in peripheral blood cells. Mediators Inflamm 2011;2011:429501, 1, 9.
- 4. Hoenderdos K, Lodge KM, Hirst RA, et al. Hypoxia upregulates neutrophil  degranulation  and  potential  for  tissue  injury. Thorax . 2016;71(11):1030-  1038.
- 5. Watts ER, Howden AJ, Morrison T, et al. Hypoxia drives murine neutrophil protein scavenging to maintain central carbon metabolism. J Clin Invest . 2021;131(10):e134073.
- 6. Maratou E, Dimitriadis G, Kollias A, et al. Glucose transporter expression on the plasma membrane of resting and activated white blood cells. Eur J Clin Invest . 2007;37(4):282-  290.
- 7. Sadiku P, Willson JA, Dickinson RS, et al. Prolyl hydroxylase 2 inactivation enhances glycogen storage and promotes excessive neutrophilic responses. J Clin Invest . 2017;127(9):3407-  3420.
- 8. Sadiku P, Willson JA, Ryan EM, et al. Neutrophils fuel effective immune responses through gluconeogenesis and glycogenesis. Cell Metab . 2021;33(2):411-  423.e4.
- 9. Thwe PM, Pelgrom LR, Cooper R, et al. Cell-  intrinsic glycogen metabolism supports early glycolytic reprogramming required for dendritic cell immune responses. Cell Metab . 2017;26(3):558-  567.e5.
- 10. Jun HS, Weinstein DA, Lee YM, Mansfield BC, Chou JY. Molecular mechanisms of neutrophil dysfunction in glycogen storage disease type Ib. Blood . 2014;123(18):2843-  2853.

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

- 11. Buvelot H, Posfay-  Barbe KM, Linder P, Schrenzel J, Krause K-  H. Staphylococcus  aureus , phagocyte  NADPH  oxidase  and  chronic granulomatous disease. FEMS Microbiol Rev . 2016;41(2):139-  157.
- 12. Britt EC, Lika J, Giese MA, et al. Switching to the cyclic pentose phosphate pathway powers the oxidative burst in activated neutrophils. Nat Metab . 2022;4(3):389-  403.
- 13. Rider NL, Jameson MB, Creech CB. Chronic granulomatous disease: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and genetic basis of disease. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc . 2018;7(Suppl\_1):S2-  S5.
- 14. Klebanoff SJ, Kettle AJ, Rosen H, Winterbourn CC, Nauseef WM. Myeloperoxidase: a front-  line defender against phagocytosed microorganisms. J Leukoc Biol . 2013;93(2):185-  198.
- 15. Liang B, Petty HR. Imaging neutrophil activation: analysis of the translocation and utilization of NAD(P)H-  associated autofluorescence during antibody-  dependent target oxidation. J Cell Physiol . 1992;152(1):145-  156.
- 16. Kuiper JWP, Sun C, Magalhães MAO, Glogauer M. Rac regulates PtdInsP3 signaling and the chemotactic compass through a redoxmediated feedback loop. Blood . 2011;118(23):6164-  6171.
- 17. Rodriguez-  Espinosa O, Rojas-  Espinosa O, Moreno-  Altamirano MM,  Lopez-  Villegas  EO,  Sanchez-  Garcia  FJ.  Metabolic  requirements  for  neutrophil  extracellular  traps  formation. Immunology . 2015;145(2):213-  224.
- 18. Azevedo  EP,  Rochael  NC,  Guimarães-  Costa  AB,  et  al.  A  metabolic  shift  toward  pentose  phosphate  pathway  is  necessary  for amyloid  fibriland  Phorbol  12-  Myristate 13-  acetate-  induced neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation. J Biol Chem . 2015;290(36):22174-  22183.
- 19. Maianski NA, Geissler J, Srinivasula SM, Alnemri ES, Roos D, Kuijpers TW. Functional characterization of mitochondria in neutrophils: a role restricted to apoptosis. Cell Death Differ . 2004;11(2):143-  153.
- 20. van Raam BJ, Sluiter W, de Wit E, Roos D, Verhoeven AJ, Kuijpers TW. Mitochondrial membrane potential in human neutrophils is maintained by complex III activity in the absence of supercomplex organisation. PLoS One . 2008;3(4):e2013.
- 21. Jones R, McDonald KE, Willson JA, et al. Mutations in succinate dehydrogenase  B  (SDHB)  enhance  neutrophil  survival  independent of HIF-  1 α expression. Blood . 2016;127(21):2641-  2644.
- 22. Zmijewski JW, Lorne E, Zhao X, et al. Mitochondrial respiratory complex I regulates neutrophil activation and severity of lung injury. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2008;178(2):168-  179.
- 23. Willson JA, Arienti S, Sadiku P, et al. Neutrophil HIF-  1 α stabilization is augmented by mitochondrial ROS produced via the glycerol 3-  phosphate shuttle. Blood . 2022;139(2):281-  286.
- 24. Curi R, Newsholme P, Pithon-  Curi TC, et al. Metabolic fate of glutamine in lymphocytes, macrophages and neutrophils. Braz J Med Biol Res . 1999;32(1):15-  21.
- 25. DeBerardinis  RJ,  Mancuso  A,  Daikhin  E,  et  al.  Beyond  aerobic glycolysis: transformed cells can engage in glutamine metabolism that exceeds the requirement for protein and nucleotide synthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2007;104(49):19345-  19350.
- 26. Kirchner  T,  Moller  S,  Klinger  M,  Solbach  W,  Laskay  T,  Behnen M.  The  impact  of  various  reactive  oxygen  species  on  the  formation of neutrophil extracellular traps. Mediators Inflamm 2012;2012:849136, 1, 10.
- 27. Curi TCP, Melo MPD, Azevedo RBD, Zorn TMT, Curi R. Glutamine utilization  by  rat  neutrophils:  presence  of  phosphate-  dependent glutaminase. Am J Physiol . 1997;273(4):C1124-  C1129.
- 28. Weisdorf D, Craddock P, Jacob H. Glycogenolysis versus glucose transport in human granulocytes: differential activation in phagocytosis and chemotaxis. Blood . 1982;60(4):888-  893.
- 29. Riffelmacher T, Clarke A, Richter FC, et al. Autophagy-  dependent generation of free fatty acids is critical for normal neutrophil differentiation. Immunity . 2017;47(3):466-  480.e5.
- 30. Chen Y,  Corriden  R,  Inoue  Y,  et  al.  ATP  release  guides  neutrophil  chemotaxis via P2Y2 and A3 receptors. Science .  2006;314(5806):1792-  1795.

- 31. Fossati G, Moulding DA, Spiller DG, Moots RJ, White MR, Edwards SW. The mitochondrial network of human neutrophils: role in chemotaxis, phagocytosis, respiratory burst activation, and commitment to apoptosis. J Immunol . 2003;170(4):1964-  1972.
- 32. Bao Y, Ledderose C, Graf AF, et al. mTOR and differential activation of mitochondria orchestrate neutrophil chemotaxis. J Cell Biol . 2015;210(7):1153-  1164.
- 33. Han D, Williams E, Cadenas E. Mitochondrial respiratory chaindependent generation of superoxide anion and its release into the intermembrane space. Biochem J . 2001;353(2):411-  416.
- 34. Arsenijevic D, Onuma H, Pecqueur C, et al. Disruption of the uncoupling protein-  2 gene in mice reveals a role in immunity and reactive oxygen species production. Nat Genet . 2000;26(4):435-  439.
- 35. Emre  Y,  Hurtaud  C,  Nübel  T,  Criscuolo  F,  Ricquier  D,  CassardDoulcier A-  M. Mitochondria contribute to LPS-  induced MAPK activation via uncoupling protein UCP2 in macrophages. Biochem J . 2007;402(2):271-  278.
- 36. Scherz-  Shouval  R,  Shvets  E,  Fass  E,  Shorer  H,  Gil  L,  Elazar  Z. Reactive oxygen species are essential for autophagy and specifically regulate the activity of Atg4. EMBO J . 2007;26(7):1749-  1760.
- 37. Rohrbach A, Slade D, Thompson P, Mowen K. Activation of PAD4 in NET formation. Front Immunol . 2012;3:360.
- 38. Douda DN, Khan MA, Grasemann H, Palaniyar N. SK3 channel and  mitochondrial  ROS  mediate  NADPH  oxidase-  independent NETosis  induced  by  calcium  influx. Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA . 2015;112(9):2817-  2822.
- 39. Yousefi S, Mihalache C, Kozlowski E, Schmid I, Simon HU. Viable neutrophils release mitochondrial DNA to form neutrophil extracellular traps. Cell Death Differ . 2009;16(11):1438-  1444.
- 40. McIlroy DJ, Jarnicki AG, Au GG, et al. Mitochondrial DNA neutrophil  extracellular  traps  are  formed after trauma and subsequent surgery. J Crit Care . 2014;29(6):1133.e1-  1133.e5.
- 41. Collins  LV,  Hajizadeh  S,  Holme  E,  Jonsson  I-  M,  Tarkowski  A. Endogenously oxidized mitochondrial DNA induces in vivo and in vitro inflammatory responses. J Leukoc Biol .  2004;75(6):995-  1000.
- 42. Fahy E, Cotter D, Sud M, Subramaniam S. Lipid classification, structures and tools. Biochim Biophys Acta . 2011;1811(11):637-  647.
- 43. van Meer G, de Kroon AI. Lipid map of the mammalian cell. J Cell Sci . 2011;124(Pt 1):5-  8.
- 44. Leslie  CC.  Regulation  of  the  specific  release  of  arachidonic  acid by cytosolic phospholipase A2. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids . 2004;70(4):373-  376.
- 45. Lammermann  T,  Afonso  PV,  Angermann  BR,  et  al.  Neutrophil swarms require LTB4 and integrins at sites of cell death in vivo. Nature . 2013;498(7454):371-  375.
- 46. St-  Onge M,  Flamand  N,  Biarc J, et al. Characterization of prostaglandin E2 generation through the cyclooxygenase (COX)-  2  pathway  in  human  neutrophils. Biochim  Biophys  Acta . 2007;1771(9):1235-  1245.
- 47. Werz  O,  Burkert  E, Samuelsson  B,  Radmark  O,  Steinhilber D.  Activation  of  5-  lipoxygenase  by  cell  stress  is  calcium  independent in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Blood . 2002;99(3):1044-  1052.
- 48. Radmark O, Shimizu T, Jornvall H, Samuelsson B. Leukotriene A4 hydrolase in human leukocytes. Purification and properties. J Biol Chem . 1984;259(20):12339-  12345.
- 49. Samuelsson B. Leukotrienes: mediators of immediate hypersensitivity reactions and inflammation. Science . 1983;220(4597):568-  575.
- 50. Gaudreault  E,  Thompson  C,  Stankova  J,  Rola-  Pleszczynski  M. Involvement  of  BLT1  endocytosis  and  yes  kinase  activation  in leukotriene B4-  induced neutrophil degranulation. J Immunol . 2005;174(6):3617-  3625.
- 51. Larfars  G,  Lantoine  F,  Devynck  MA,  Palmblad  J,  Gyllenhammar H. Activation of nitric oxide release and oxidative metabolism by leukotrienes B4, C4, and D4 in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Blood . 1999;93(4):1399-  1405.

- 52. Sala A, Zarini S, Folco G, Murphy RC, Henson PM. Differential metabolism of exogenous and endogenous arachidonic acid in human neutrophils. J Biol Chem . 1999;274(40):28264-  28269.
- 53. Honda T, Segi-  Nishida E, Miyachi Y, Narumiya S. Prostacyclin-  IP signaling  and  prostaglandin  E2-  EP2/EP4  signaling  both  mediate joint inflammation in mouse collagen-  induced arthritis. J Exp Med . 2006;203(2):325-  335.
- 54. Bozza  PT,  Bakker-  Abreu  I,  Navarro-  Xavier  RA,  Bandeira-  Melo C. Lipid body  function in eicosanoid synthesis: an update. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids . 2011;85(5):205-  213.
- 55. Lutas EM, Zucker-  Franklin D. Formation of lipid inclusions in normal human leukocytes. Blood . 1977;49(2):309-  320.
- 56. Alarcon-  Barrera JC, von Hegedus JH, Brouwers H, et al. Lipid metabolism of leukocytes in the unstimulated and activated states. Anal Bioanal Chem . 2020;412(10):2353-  2363.
- 57. Schlager S, Goeritzer M, Jandl K, et al. Adipose triglyceride lipase acts on neutrophil lipid droplets to regulate substrate availability for lipid mediator synthesis. J Leukoc Biol . 2015;98(5):837-  850.
- 58. Burns CP, Welshman IR, Spector AA. Differences in free fatty acid and glucose metabolism of human blood neutrophils and lymphocytes. Blood . 1976;47(3):431-  437.
- 59. Garcia Gil M, Alonso F, Alvarez Chiva V, Sanchez Crespo M, Mato JM.  Phospholipid  turnover  during  phagocytosis  in  human  polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Biochem J . 1982;206(1):67-  72.
- 60. May GL, Wright LC, Obbink KG, et al. Increased saturated triacylglycerol levels in plasma membranes of human neutrophils stimulated by lipopolysaccharide. J Lipid Res . 1997;38(8):1562-  1570.
- 61. Neumann A, Brogden G, Jerjomiceva N, Brodesser S, Naim HY, von Köckritz-  Blickwede M. Lipid alterations in human blood-  derived neutrophils lead to formation of neutrophil extracellular traps. Eur J Cell Biol . 2014;93(8-  9):347-  354.
- 62. Simons K, Ikonen E. Functional rafts in cell membranes. Nature . 1997;387(6633):569-  572.
- 63. Sitrin RG,  Sassanella  TM,  Landers  JJ,  Petty  HR.  Migrating human neutrophils exhibit dynamic spatiotemporal variation  in  membrane  lipid  organization. Am J Respir  Cell  Mol  Biol . 2010;43(4):498-  506.
- 64. Seumois G, Fillet M, Gillet L, et al. De novo C16- and C24-  ceramide generation  contributes  to  spontaneous  neutrophil  apoptosis. J Leukoc Biol . 2007;81(6):1477-  1486.
- 65. Barth PG, Scholte HR, Berden JA, et al. An X-  linked mitochondrial disease affecting cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle and neutrophil leucocytes. J Neurol Sci . 1983;62(1-  3):327-  355.
- 66. Sohn J, Milosevic J, Brouse T, et al. A new murine model of Barth syndrome neutropenia links TAFAZZIN deficiency to increased ER stress-  induced apoptosis. Blood Adv . 2022;6(8):2557-  2577.
- 67. Claypool SM, Oktay Y, Boontheung P, Loo JA, Koehler CM. Cardiolipin defines the interactome of the major ADP/ATP carrier protein of the mitochondrial inner membrane. J Cell Biol . 2008;182(5):937-  950.
- 68. Ron-  Harel N, Santos D, Ghergurovich JM, et al. Mitochondrial biogenesis and proteome remodeling promote one-  carbon metabolism for T cell activation. Cell Metab . 2016;24(1):104-  117.
- 69. DeNicola  GM,  Chen  P-  H,  Mullarky  E,  et  al.  NRF2  regulates serine  biosynthesis  in  non-  small  cell  lung  cancer. Nat  Genet . 2015;47(12):1475-  1481.
- 70. Azzouz D, Khan MA, Palaniyar N. ROS induces NETosis by oxidizing DNA and initiating DNA repair. Cell Death Discov . 2021;7(1):113.
- 71. Cosentino C, Grieco D, Costanzo V. ATM activates the pentose phosphate pathway promoting anti-  oxidant defence and DNA repair. EMBO J . 2011;30(3):546-  555.
- 72. Fan J, Ye J, Kamphorst JJ, Shlomi T, Thompson CB, Rabinowitz JD. Quantitative flux analysis reveals folate-  dependent NADPH production. Nature . 2014;510(7504):298-  302.
- 73. Ducker GS, Chen L, Morscher RJ, et al. Reversal of cytosolic onecarbon flux compensates for loss of the mitochondrial folate pathway. Cell Metab . 2016;23(6):1140-  1153.

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

.

- 74. Yan J, Meng X, Wancket LM, et al. Glutathione reductase facilitates host defense by sustaining phagocytic oxidative burst and promoting  the  development  of  neutrophil  extracellular  traps. J Immunol . 2012;188(5):2316-  2327.
- 75. Yuyun  X,  Fan  Y,  Weiping  W,  Qing  Y,  Bingwei  S.  Metabolomic analysis  of  spontaneous  neutrophil  apoptosis  reveals  the  potential involvement of glutathione depletion. Innate Immun . 2021;27(1):31-  40.
- 76. Cuadrado A, Rojo AI, Wells G, et al. Therapeutic targeting of the NRF2 and KEAP1 partnership in chronic diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov . 2019;18(4):295-  317.
- 77. Kobayashi EH, Suzuki T, Funayama R, et al. Nrf2 suppresses macrophage inflammatory response by blocking proinflammatory cytokine transcription. Nat Commun . 2016;7(1):11624.
- 78. Ryan DG, Knatko EV, Casey AM, et al. Nrf2 activation reprograms macrophage intermediary metabolism and suppresses the type I interferon response. iScience . 2022;25(2):103827.
- 79. Helou DG, Braham S, De Chaisemartin L, et al. Nrf2 downregulates  zymosan-  induced  neutrophil  activation  and  modulates  migration. PLOS One . 2019;14(8):e0216465.
- 80. Helou DG, Noël B, Gaudin F, et al. Cutting edge: Nrf2 regulates neutrophil  recruitment  and  accumulation  in  skin  during  contact hypersensitivity. J Immunol . 2019;202(8):2189-  2194.
- 81. Saxton RA, Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling in growth, metabolism, and disease. Cell . 2017;168(6):960-  976.
- 82. Dibble  CC,  Manning  BD.  Signal  integration  by  mTORC1  coordinates  nutrient  input  with  biosynthetic  output. Nat  Cell  Biol . 2013;15(6):555-  564.
- 83. Ben-  Sahra I, Hoxhaj G, Ricoult SJH, Asara JM, Manning BD. mTORC1 induces purine synthesis through control of the mitochondrial tetrahydrofolate cycle. Science (New York, NY) . 2016;351(6274):728-  733.
- 84. Dodd KM, Yang J, Shen MH, Sampson JR, Tee AR. mTORC1 drives HIF-  1 α and VEGF-  A signalling via multiple mechanisms involving 4 E-  BP1, S6K1 and STAT3. Oncogene . 2015;34(17):2239-  2250.
- 85. Palm W, Park Y, Wright K, Pavlova NN, Tuveson DA, Thompson CB.  The  utilization  of  extracellular  proteins  as  nutrients  is  suppressed by mTORC1. Cell . 2015;162(2):259-  270.
- 86. Tyagi S, Gupta P, Saini AS, Kaushal C, Sharma S. The peroxisome proliferator-  activated receptor: a family of nuclear receptors role in various diseases. J Adv Pharm Technol Res . 2011;2(4):236-  240.
- 87. Li  S,  Zhou  Q,  He  H,  Zhao  Y,  Liu  Z.  Peroxisome  proliferatoractivated receptor γ agonists induce cell cycle arrest through transcriptional regulation of Kruppel-  like factor 4 (KLF4). J Biol Chem . 2013;288(6):4076-  4084.
- 88. Ahmadian  M,  Suh  JM,  Hah  N,  et  al.  PPARgamma  signaling and  metabolism:  the  good,  the  bad  and  the  future. Nat  Med . 2013;19(5):557-  566.
- 89. Staels  B,  Koenig  W,  Habib  A,  et  al.  Activation  of  human  aortic smooth-  muscle cells is inhibited by PPAR α but not by PPAR γ activators. Nature . 1998;393(6687):790-  793.
- 90. Kim YS, Lee H-  M, Kim JK, et al. PPAR-   activation mediates innate α host  defense  through  induction  of  TFEB  and  lipid  catabolism. J Immunol . 2017;198(8):3283-  3295.
- 91. Christofides A, Konstantinidou E, Jani C, Boussiotis VA. The role of peroxisome proliferator-  activated receptors (PPAR) in immune responses. Metabolism . 2021;114:154338.
- 92. Sharma R, Kaundal RK, Sharma SS. Amelioration of pulmonary dysfunction and neutrophilic inflammation by PPAR γ agonist in LPSexposed Guinea pigs. Pulm Pharmacol Ther . 2009;22(3):183-  189.
- 93. Reddy RC, Narala VR, Keshamouni VG, Milam JE, Newstead MW, Standiford TJ. Sepsis-  induced inhibition of neutrophil chemotaxis is  mediated  by  activation  of  peroxisome  proliferator-  activated receptor-  gamma. Blood . 2008;112(10):4250-  4258.
- 94. Cuartero MI, Ballesteros I, Moraga A, et al. N2 neutrophils,  novel  players  in  brain  inflammation  after  stroke. Stroke . 2013;44(12):3498-  3508.

M

O

R

I

S

O

N

- 95. Croasdell  A,  Duffney  PF,  Kim  N,  Lacy  SH,  Sime  PJ,  Phipps  RP. PPAR  and the innate immune system mediate the resolution of γ inflammation. PPAR Res . 2015;2015:549691.
- 96. Quintin J, Saeed S, Martens JHA, et al. Candida albicans infection affords  protection  against  reinfection  via  functional  reprogramming of monocytes. Cell Host Microbe . 2012;12(2):223-  232.
- 97. Kaufmann E, Sanz J, Dunn JL, et al. BCG educates hematopoietic stem cells to generate protective innate immunity against tuberculosis. Cell . 2018;172(1-  2):176-  190.e119.
- 98. Durrant  WE,  Dong  X.  Systemic  acquired  resistance. Annu  Rev Phytopathol . 2004;42(1):185-  209.
- 99. Netea  MG,  Domínguez-  Andrés  J,  Barreiro  LB,  et  al.  Defining trained  immunity  and  its  role  in  health  and  disease. Nat  Rev Immunol . 2020;20(6):375-  388.
- 100. Chavakis T, Mitroulis I, Hajishengallis G. Hematopoietic progenitor cells as integrative hubs for adaptation to and fine-  tuning of inflammation. Nat Immunol . 2019;20(7):802-  811.
- 101. Tyrakis PA, Palazon A, Macias D, et al. S-  2-  hydroxyglutarate regulates CD8 + T-  lymphocyte fate. Nature . 2016;540(7632):236-  241.
- 102. Peng M, Yin N, Chhangawala S, Xu K, Leslie CS, Li MO. Aerobic glycolysis promotes T helper 1 cell differentiation through an epigenetic mechanism. Science . 2016;354(6311):481-  484.
- 103. Arts RJ, Novakovic B, Ter Horst R, et al. Glutaminolysis and fumarate accumulation integrate Immunometabolic and epigenetic programs in trained immunity. Cell Metab . 2016;24(6):807-  819.
- 104. Thompson AA, Dickinson RS, Murphy F, et al. Hypoxia determines survival  outcomes of bacterial infection through HIF-  1alpha dependent re-  programming  of  leukocyte  metabolism. Sci  Immunol . 2017;2(8):eaal2861.
- 105. Cheng SC, Quintin J, Cramer RA, et al. mTOR- and HIF-  1 α -  mediated aerobic glycolysis as metabolic basis for trained immunity. Science . 2014;345(6204):1250684.
- 106. Lu Y-  Z, Wu C-  C, Huang Y-  C, et al. Neutrophil priming by hypoxic preconditioning protects against epithelial barrier damage and enteric bacterial translocation in intestinal ischemia/reperfusion. Lab Invest . 2012;92(5):783-  796.
- 107. Lu  YZ,  Huang  CY,  Huang  YC,  et  al.  Tumor  necrosis  factor α -dependent neutrophil priming prevents intestinal ischemia/ reperfusion-  induced bacterial translocation. Dig Dis Sci . 2017;62(6):1498-  1510.
- 108. Mistry P, Nakabo S, O'Neil L, et al. Transcriptomic, epigenetic, and functional  analyses  implicate  neutrophil  diversity  in  the  pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2019;116(50):25222-  25228.
- 109. Ballesteros I, Rubio-  Ponce A, Genua M, et al. Co-  option of neutrophil fates by tissue environments. Cell . 2020;183(5):1282-  1297. e18.
- 110. Kalafati L, Kourtzelis I, Schulte-  Schrepping J, et al. Innate immune training  of  Granulopoiesis  promotes  anti-  tumor  activity. Cell . 2020;183(3):771-  785.e12.
- 111. Li  X,  Wang  H,  Yu  X,  et  al.  Maladaptive  innate  immune  training of myelopoiesis links inflammatory comorbidities. Cell . 2022;185(10):1709-  1727.e18.
- 112. Mirchandani AS, Jenkins SJ, Bain CC, et al. Hypoxia shapes the immune landscape in lung injury and promotes the persistence of inflammation. Nat Immunol . 2022;23(6):927-  939.
- 113. Frost  J,  Frost  M,  Batie  M,  Jiang  H,  Rocha  S.  Roles  of  HIF  and 2-  Oxoglutarate-  dependent  dioxygenases  in  controlling  gene  expression in hypoxia. Cancer . 2021;13(2):350.
- 114. Reyes L, Sanchez-  Garcia MA, Morrison T, et al. A type I IFN, prothrombotic hyperinflammatory neutrophil signature is distinct for COVID-  19 ARDS. Wellcome Open Res . 2021;6:38.

<!-- image -->

- 115. Alba-  Loureiro TC, Hirabara SM, Mendonca JR, Curi R, Pithon-  Curi TC. Diabetes causes marked changes in function and metabolism of rat neutrophils. J Endocrinol . 2006;188(2):295-  303.
- 116. Munroe JF, Shipp JC. Glucose metabolism in leucocytes from patients  with  diabetes  mellitus,  with  and  without  Hypercholesteremia. Diabetes . 1965;14(9):584-  590.
- 117. Kashima K, Sato N, Sato K, Shimizu H, Mori M. Effect of Epalrestat, an aldose reductase inhibitor, on the generation of oxygen-  derived free radicals in neutrophils from Streptozotocin-  induced diabetic rats*. Endocrinology . 1998;139(8):3404-  3408.
- 118. Nishikawa T, Edelstein D, Du XL, et al. Normalizing mitochondrial superoxide production blocks three pathways of hyperglycaemic damage. Nature . 2000;404(6779):787-  790.
- 119. Wilson  RM,  Tomlinson  DR,  Reeves  WG.  Neutrophil  sorbitol production  impairs  oxidative  killing  in  diabetes. Diabet  Med . 1987;4(1):37-  40.
- 120. Joshi MB,  Ahamed  R,  Hegde  M,  Nair  AS,  Ramachandra  L, Satyamoorthy  K.  Glucose  induces  metabolic  reprogramming  in neutrophils during type 2 diabetes to form constitutive extracellular traps and decreased responsiveness to lipopolysaccharides. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis . 2020;1866(12):165940.
- 121. Kuwabara WM, Curi R, Alba-  Loureiro TC. Autophagy is impaired in  neutrophils  from  Streptozotocin-  induced  diabetic  rats. Front Immunol . 2017;8:24.
- 122. Szendroedi J, Phielix E, Roden M. The role of mitochondria in insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol . 2011;8(2):92-  103.
- 123. Fischer HJ, Sie C, Schumann E, et al. The insulin receptor plays a critical role in T cell function and adaptive immunity. J  Immunol . 2017;198(5):1910-  1920.
- 124. Khan S, Raghuram GV, Bhargava A, et al. Role and clinical significance of lymphocyte mitochondrial dysfunction in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Transl Res . 2011;158(6):344-  359.
- 125. Hernandez-  Mijares A, Rocha M, Apostolova N, et al. Mitochondrial complex I impairment in leukocytes from type 2 diabetic patients. Free Radic Biol Med . 2011;50(10):1215-  1221.
- 126. Dugan LL, You YH, Ali SS, et al.  AMPK dysregulation promotes diabetes-  related reduction of superoxide and mitochondrial function. J Clin Invest . 2013;123(11):4888-  4899.
- 127. Bai J, Liu F. The cGAS-  cGAMP-  STING pathway: a molecular link between immunity and metabolism. Diabetes . 2019;68(6):1099-  1108.
- 128. Hsu BE, Tabariès S, Johnson RM, et al. Immature low-  density neutrophils exhibit metabolic flexibility that facilitates breast cancer liver metastasis. Cell Rep . 2019;27(13):3902-  3915.e6.
- 129. Rice  CM,  Davies  LC,  Subleski  JJ,  et  al.  Tumour-  elicited  neutrophils  engage  mitochondrial  metabolism  to  circumvent  nutrient limitations and maintain immune  suppression. Nat  Commun . 2018;9(1):5099.
- 130. Veglia F, Tyurin VA, Blasi M, et al. Fatty acid transport protein 2 reprograms neutrophils in cancer. Nature . 2019;569(7754):73-  78.

How to cite this article: Morrison T, Watts ER, Sadiku P, Walmsley SR. The emerging role for metabolism in fueling neutrophilic inflammation. Immunol Rev . 2023;314:427-441. doi: 10.1111/imr.13157