<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Evaluation of oxidative stress level: reactive oxygen species, reduced glutathione, and D-dimer in patients hospitalized due to COVID-19

Claudionei Roessler a , Karen Cristine Silva de Oliveira b , Auricélia Xavier de Oliveira Portella c , Paulo Cezar Nunes Fortes d , Franciéle Romero Machado e , Stífani Machado Araujo f , Marina Prigol e , Léia Carolina Lucio a , Dalila Moter Benvegnú f and Lirane Elize Defante Ferreto a

a Postgraduate Program in Applied Health Sciences and Multidisciplinary Laboratory of Biosciences and Health, State University of Western Paraná - UNIOESTE, Francisco Beltrão, Brazil; b Graduated in Nutrition, Federal University of Fronteira Sul (UFFS), Realeza, Brazil; c State Health O /uniFB03 ce, Hospital Regional Walter Alberto Pecoits (HRS), Francisco Beltrão, Brazil; d Health Sciences Center, State University of Western Paraná (UNIOESTE), Francisco Beltrão, Brazil; e Postgraduate Program in Biochemistry, Federal University of Pampa (UNIPAMPA), Itaqui, Brazil; f Federal University of Fronteira Sul (UFFS), Realeza, Brazil

## ABSTRACT

Elevated D-dimer levels at hospital admission may also indicate a higher likelihood of progressing to a severe or critical state. This study aimed to assess reactive oxygen species (ROS), non-enzymatic antioxidant reduced glutathione (GSH), and D-dimer levels in COVID-19 patients upon admission, examining their association with mortality outcomes. Data was collected from the medical records of 170 patients hospitalized in a referral hospital unit between March 2020 and December 2021. Patients were divided into two groups: the ward bed group ( n = 87), comprising 51% with moderate clinical conditions, and the intensive care unit (ICU) group ( n = 83), comprising 49% with severe conditions. The mean age was 59.4 years, with a male predominance of 52.4%. The overall death rate was 43%, with 30.6% in the moderate group and 69.4% in the severe group. The average time from symptom onset to hospitalization was 6.42 days. Results showed that nonsurvivors had high D-dimer and ROS counts, longer ICU stays, and worse saturation levels at admission. In conclusion, elevated ROS and D-dimer levels may contribute to worse outcomes in critically ill patients, potentially serving as speci /uniFB01 c and sensitive predictors of poor outcomes upon admission.

## 1. Introduction

The challenge in terms of containing the COVID-19 pandemic is being compounded by SARS-CoV-2 subvariants that demonstrate greater potential for transmissibility and resistance to existing vaccines and therapies [1]. These facts may be associated with adaptive mutations in the viral genome that alter the pathogenic potential of the virus [2]. Although the progression of the disease is still not fully understood, there are strong indications that oxidative stress, caused by an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and/or a reduction in the antioxidant defense system, is one of the crucial factors for the evolution of the clinical picture [3]. Thus, patients with mild symptoms of the disease have a rapid recovery, while those with moderate to severe disease signs have a high mortality and poor prognosis [4].

Patients with COVID-19 and in the severe condition have increased levels of reactive oxygen species, free radicals and often have decreased levels of glutathione, triggering a cytokine storm [5]. In addition to inducing a cytokine storm, SARSCoV-2 triggers redox imbalance, causing lung in /uniFB02 ammation, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), multiple organ failure, resulting in patient death [6,7].

Although the progression of the disease is still not fully understood, there are strong indications that oxidative stress, caused by an increase in reactive oxygen species

CONTACT

Lirane Elize Defante Ferreto

lferreto@gmail.com

State University of Western Paraná

(UNIOESTE). Rod. Vitório Traiano, Km 2, Bairro Água Branca

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Francisco Beltrão (PR) - Brasil CEP 85601-970

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor &amp; Francis Group

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.

## KEYWORDS

SARS-CoV-2; pandemic; oxidative stress; reduced glutathione; d-dimer; reactive oxygen species; critical illness; intensive care unit (ICU)

(ROS) and/or a reduction in the antioxidant defense system, is one of the crucial factors for the evolution of the clinical picture [3]. Oxidative stress has been observed in other in /uniFB02 ammatory and infectious diseases, and may be the point of connection with the cytokine storm caused by COVID-19, aggravating tissue damage and inducing hypoxia and organ failure [8]. However, clinical recovery may be associated with antioxidant components through enzymatic systems that help prevent oxidative damage to cells and regulate metabolic pathways essential for homeostasis [9].

Still in this context, a host defense response is expected through the respiratory epithelial lining (GSH, beta-defensins and immunoglobulin A (IgA)), which positively regulate the innate and adaptive immune responses and help to prevent the progression of the infection to more serious stages [6]. Evidence indicates that the decrease in antioxidant levels [10 -12], especially reduced glutathione (GSH), in the presence of pre-existing comorbidities, can add individual fragility and aggravate the viral infection picture [13]. These factors shift the redox homeostasis to oxidative stress, thus exacerbating lung in /uniFB02 ammation and leading to ARDS, multiple organ failure and patient death [7].

Information on oxidative status through redox biomarkers can help to better understand the evolution of COVID-19 and provide support for clinical decision-making, avoiding the

<!-- image -->

mortality outcome [8,14,15]. In this context, the need to evaluate the levels of biomarkers such as ROS, GSH, Ddimer and their association with prognosis and mortality outcome is justi /uniFB01 ed at the time of admission of patients with COVID-19.

## 2 Material and methods

## 2.1 Study design, sample characterization and ethical procedures

This is a quantitative, descriptive and cross-sectional study, involving 170 patients diagnosed with COVID-19, from March 2020 to December 2021, who were admitted to a reference hospital. Data were collected from electronic medical records through the Hospital and Outpatient Management System (GSUS) program of patients of both genders and aged over 18 years. As inclusion criteria, hospitalized individuals participated and had reactive results for SARS-CoV-2 through nasopharyngeal swab collection, using the gold standard test -real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRTPCR). As exclusion criteria, individuals with a non-reagent or undetermined diagnosis were adopted, as well as in cases of impossibility of carrying out the collection of biological material (blood) and data from the patients ' medical records.

The project was approved by the Ethics Committee in Research involving Human Beings (CEP) and by the Ethics Committee in Research (CEP), Opinion n° 4.224.011 and Certi /uniFB01 cate of Presentation for Ethical Appreciation (CAAE) n° 31837720.5.0000.0107.

## 2.2 Study design

During hospitalization, patient data were recorded in a mixed way, using printed forms standardized by the hospital institution and electronic medical records, through the Hospital and Outpatient Management System program (GSUS).

At the time of hospitalization of patients, a sample of 9 mL of venous blood was collected via venipuncture of the forearm, by the nursing team. Part of the biological material (4 mL) was placed in a tube containing EDTA anticoagulant, which was immediately stored in an ultra-freezer ( -80°C) at the Laboratory of the State University of Western Paraná (UNIOESTE) until the moment of carrying out the analyzes of the oxidative status biomarkers. The rest of the blood (5 mL) was placed in a tube containing citrate anticoagulant, refrigerated and immediately delivered to an outsourced laboratory for sample processing, with plasma separation and subsequent D-dimer analysis. This was processed at the time of patient admission by the Laboratory that serves the hospital unit.

## 2.3 Oxidative stress biomarker assays

In order to determine ROS levels, the whole blood sample was diluted (1:10) in 10 mM Tris HCl (pH7.4) and incubated with 10 μ L of 2 ,7 -dichloro ' ' /uniFB02 uorescein diacetate (DCHF-DA; 1 mM), at 37°C for 60 min. ROS levels were determined by a spectro /uniFB02 uorimetric method, using the assay, where DCHFDA, which is enzymatically hydrolyzed by intracellular esterase enzymes to form non/uniFB02 uorescent DCFH, and it is rapidly oxidized to form 2 ,7 -dichloro ' ' /uniFB02 uorescein (DCF), highly /uniFB02 uorescent in the presence of ROS. The /uniFB02 uorescence intensity of

DCF is proportional to the amount of ROS present in the sample. The emission of DCF /uniFB02 uorescence intensity was recorded at 520 nm, with excitation of 488 nm, for excitation, 520 nm for emission and beam 1.5. ROS levels were expressed in arbitrary units (AU) [16]. This analysis was performed at the Federal University of Pampa (UNIPAMPA), in Itaqui, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

Reduced glutathione (GSH) levels were evaluated using the procedure described by [17]. First, in order to measure the GSH levels, the whole blood sample was deproteinized with 10% trichloroacetic acid and after previous hemolysis with 1% triton. Next, the supernatant was used to react the levels of non-protein thiol groups (SH-NP) which were determined after the reaction with 5,5 -dithiobis-(2-nitro-' benzoic acid) (DTNB) and the color developed was measured spectrophotometrically at 412 nm. SH-NP levels indicate an indirect measure of GSH and results are expressed as µmol GSH/mL whole blood. This analysis was carried out at the Federal University of Fronteira Sul (UFFS), in Realeza, Paraná, Brazil.

## 2.4 D-dimer

Analyzes of D-dimer were performed on the Semiautomatic Fluorescence Analyzer DETECH (Guangzhou, China). Blood was collected in a sodium citrate tube, centrifuged for 5 min at 4.000 rpm, and then a 100 µL aliquot of whole blood was incubated in the cassette for 15 min before reading. Results with a value &gt; 0.5 mg/L indicate stable coagulation and /uniFB01 brinolysis. The results are expressed in ng/mL of whole blood.

## 2.5 Statistical analysis

The distribution of qualitative data was described by frequencies and percentages and compared between two groups (patients hospitalized in ward beds and ICU beds) using the chi-square test and Fisher s ' exact test. Quantitative data were described as mean ± standard deviation (SD), median and interquartile range (IQR), and their normal distribution was evaluated using the Shapiro -Wilk test. In case of normal distribution, the means of the quantitative data were compared in two groups by the independent t test; and in the case in which the distribution was not normal, the Mann Whitney test was performed and for the SpO2 vari--able, the Kruskal -Wallis test. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and the area under the curve were used to determine the feasibility of using oxidative status and Ddimer biomarkers as classi /uniFB01 ers to predict death among patients. All analyzes were performed at signi /uniFB01 cance levels of 0.05, using SPSS version 23 (SPSS Inc., USA) and GraphPad Prism version 3 for Windows.

## 3 Results

## 3.1 General and clinical characteristics of patients with Covid-19

Regarding data collection, the predominance of the age group of patients over 60 years old, male, hospitalizations for more than 7 days and in the year 2021 was evidenced. In total, 170 patients participated, whose main demographic

Table 1. General characteristics of the total sample and strati /uniFB01 ed by nonsurvivors and survivors.

|                        | Total ( n = 170) n (%)   | Non-survivors ( n = 72) n (%)   | Survivors ( n = 98) n (%)   | P -value   |
|------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------|-----------------------------|------------|
| Gender                 |                          |                                 |                             | 0.148      |
| Male                   | 87 (51.2%)               | 42 (58.3%)                      | 45 (45.9%)                  |            |
| Female                 | 83 (48.8%)               | 30(41.7%)                       | 53(54.1%)                   |            |
| Age                    |                          |                                 |                             | 0.359      |
| 18 - 59 years          | 81 (47.6%)               | 28 (38.9%)                      | 53 (54,1%)                  |            |
| 60 - 94 years          | 89 (52.4%)               | 44 (61.1%)                      | 45 (45,9%)                  |            |
| Hospitalization sector |                          |                                 |                             | &lt;0.000     |
| Clinics                | 87 (51.2%)               | 22 (30.6%)                      | 65 (66.3%)                  |            |
| ICU                    | 83 (48.8%)               | 50 (69.4%)                      | 33 (33.7%)                  |            |
| Hospitalization        |                          |                                 |                             | 0.005      |
| length                 |                          |                                 |                             |            |
| ≤ 1 week               | 67 (39.4%)               | 19 (26.4%)                      | 48 (49%)                    |            |
| &gt;1 week                | 103 (60.6%)              | 53 (73.6%)                      | 50 (51%)                    |            |
| SpO2                   |                          |                                 |                             | 0.016      |
| &lt;88                    | 37 (21.8%)               | 23 (31.9%)                      | 14 (14.3%)                  |            |
| 88 - 90                | 21 (12.4%)               | 06 (8.3%)                       | 15 (15.3%)                  |            |
| &gt;90                    | 112 (65.9%)              | 43 (59.7%)                      | 69 (70.4%)                  |            |

Note: ICU = intensive care unit; SAH = systemic arterial hypertension; OPD = obstructive pulmonary disease.

characteristics are presented in Table 1. No signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erences regarding gender and age were observed between groups ( p &gt; 0.05). Nonetheless, there was a signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence in relation to the non-survivors group, in which admissions to the ICU sector prevailed (69.4%). As for the number of days of hospitalization, there was a predominance of hospitalizations &gt;1 week, with 73.6%, and even patients with SpO2 &lt; 88 at the time of hospitalization represented 31.9% .

The results for D-dimer markers, ROS and GSH were described by means and 95% con dence intervals /uniFB01 in the groups of non-survivors and survivors, and then presented in Figure 1. D-dimer levels were signi /uniFB01 cantly higher in the non-survivors group, as well as ROS, p &lt; 0.009, p &lt; 0.05, respectively. GSH, on the other hand, but without statistical signi /uniFB01 cance ( p &lt; 0.79) (Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Table 2. Relationship between D-dimer (ng/mL) and other demographic characteristics of the studied population.

<!-- image -->

Table 4 represents the relationship between ROS level and the other parameters in all patients. The results of this table indicate that patients hospitalized in the ICU had signi /uniFB01 cantly higher mean (SD) and median (IQR) ROS level.

| Result                 | N   | Mean     | SD       | Median   | IQR      | P -value   |
|------------------------|-----|----------|----------|----------|----------|------------|
| Gender                 |     |          |          |          |          | 0.712      |
| Male                   | 50  | 1,644.75 | 2,228.16 | 913.44   | 1,315.43 |            |
| Female                 | 53  | 2,383.14 | 3,263.02 | 790      | 1,865.43 |            |
| Age                    |     |          |          |          |          | 0.113      |
| 19 - 59 years          | 52  | 1,631.61 | 2,421.98 | 650      | 1,149.04 |            |
| 60 - 86 years          | 51  | 2,425.49 | 3,148.21 | 960.52   | 1,857.18 |            |
| Hospitalization        |     |          |          |          |          | 0.024      |
| sector                 |     |          |          |          |          |            |
| Clinics                | 53  | 1,424.14 | 2,223.50 | 731.07   | 955.70   |            |
| ICU                    | 50  | 2,661.29 | 3,240.53 | 1,058.60 | 3,205.31 |            |
| Hospitalization length |     |          |          |          |          | 0.851      |
| ≤ 1 week               | 35  | 1,889.07 | 2,583.43 | 903,00   | 1.374,24 |            |
| &gt;1 week                | 68  | 2,094.51 | 2,949.98 | 890,08   | 1.732,91 |            |
| SpO2                   |     |          |          |          |          | 0.502      |
| &lt;88                    | 23  | 1,446.81 | 2,020.73 | 731.07   | 1,293.89 |            |
| 88 - 90                | 12  | 2,714.29 | 3,598.05 | 1,073.61 | 3,368.30 |            |
| &gt;90                    | 68  | 2,098.47 | 2,903.83 | 912.91   | 1,720.32 |            |

Wilcoxon test.

Table 2 represents the relationship between D-dimer level and other parameters in all patients. The results of this table indicate that patients hospitalized in the ICU had signi /uniFB01 cantly higher mean (SD) and median (IQR) D-dimer.

Table 3 represents the relationship between GSH level and the other parameters in all patients. The results of this table indicate that there was no signi /uniFB01 cant di /uniFB00 erence between any parameter.

In Figure 2, the analysis of the ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) curve showed that D-dimer and ROS have potential speci /uniFB01 city and sensitivity to distinguish between living and dead patients. D-dimer: 75.44% sensitivity and 58.70% speci /uniFB01 city ( p &lt; 0.009, cuto /uniFB00 value of 1059 ug/L); GSH: 61.11% sensitivity and 50% speci /uniFB01 city (p:0.79); ROS:

<!-- image -->

Table 3. Relationship between reduced glutathione (GSH) (µmol/mL) and other demographic characteristics of the studied population.

| Result                 | N   | Mean   | SD    | Median   | IQR   | P -value   |
|------------------------|-----|--------|-------|----------|-------|------------|
| Gender                 |     |        |       |          |       | 0.238      |
| Male                   | 68  | 110.63 | 30.47 | 107.61   | 41.64 |            |
| Female                 | 58  | 106.33 | 41.50 | 98.12    | 38.86 |            |
| Age                    |     |        |       |          |       | 0.126      |
| 19 - 59 years          | 63  | 114.30 | 38.30 | 110.68   | 46.41 |            |
| 60 - 86 years          | 63  | 102.99 | 32.62 | 96.87    | 33.26 |            |
| Hospitalization        |     |        |       |          |       | 0.511      |
| sector                 |     |        |       |          |       |            |
| Clinics                | 61  | 109.34 | 32.99 | 104.37   | 41.30 |            |
| ICU                    | 65  | 108.00 | 38.64 | 104.96   | 37.83 |            |
| Hospitalization length |     |        |       |          |       | 0.741      |
| ≤ 1 week               | 49  | 107.94 | 30.45 | 104.37   | 40.85 |            |
| &gt;1 week                | 77  | 109.10 | 39.13 | 104.96   | 39.96 |            |
| SpO2                   |     |        |       |          |       | 0.882      |
| &lt;88                    | 26  | 105.46 | 29.09 | 114.69   | 35.97 |            |
| 88 - 90                | 16  | 113.90 | 39.86 | 106.20   | 42.10 |            |
| &gt;90                    | 84  | 108.64 | 37.26 | 98.30    | 43.26 |            |

Wilcoxon test.

56.12% sensitivity and 63.89% speci /uniFB01 city (p:0.05, cuto /uniFB00 value of 4,647 AUµM), by Younden Index (J) [18].

## 4 Discussion

It was shown that, upon hospital admission, tests such as elevated ROS and D-dimer are associated with an increased risk of needing to be hospitalized in the ICU. The same biomarkers showed potential speci /uniFB01 city and sensitivity as predictors of poor outcome upon admission. In this sense, the novelty of this study is the use of the ROS and D-dimer biomarkers to predict prognosis of COVID-19 patients [10 -12].

The unregulated production of ROS generates oxidative stress and contributes to the pathophysiology of several diseases [19]. Similar results were evidenced in a study carried out with 15 patients with COVID-19 hospitalized in the ICU, 12 patients with sepsis and non-COVID-19 and 18 healthy volunteers, in which the production of ROS was markedly elevated and with median values 09 times higher than in healthy controls and showed an increase in mechanically ventilated and ICU admissions [20].

ROS are signaling molecules that regulate a wide variety of physiological functions. They are part of the mechanisms that lead to the elimination of virus-infected cells and the recovery of the patient [21]. ROS are generated endogenously especially through the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

Table 4. Relationship between reactive oxygen species (ROS) (AU) and other demographic characteristics of the studied population.

| Result                 | N   | Mean     | SD       | Median   | IQR      | P -value   |
|------------------------|-----|----------|----------|----------|----------|------------|
| Gender                 |     |          |          |          |          | 0.403      |
| Male                   | 87  | 6,402.19 | 7,006.70 | 5,081.00 | 5,089.00 |            |
| Female                 | 83  | 6,579.48 | 5,828.76 | 5,247.00 | 5,751.00 |            |
| Idade                  |     |          |          |          |          | 0.685      |
| 19 - 59 years          | 81  | 6,355.43 | 6,753.37 | 4,585.00 | 5,316.00 |            |
| 60 - 86 years          | 89  | 6,610.08 | 6,177.23 | 5,247.00 | 5,812.00 |            |
| Hospitalization sector |     |          |          |          |          | 0.038      |
| Clinics                | 87  | 5,882.49 | 6,444.25 | 4,254.00 | 4,964.00 |            |
| ICU                    | 83  | 7,124.22 | 6,413.00 | 5,412.00 | 5,544.00 |            |
| Hospitalization length |     |          |          |          |          | 0.285      |
| ≤ 1 week               | 67  | 5.459,52 | 4.025,27 | 4.419,00 | 4.303,00 |            |
| &gt;1 week                | 103 | 7.158,25 | 7.555,54 | 5.412,00 | 6.330,00 |            |
| SpO2                   |     |          |          |          |          | 0.240      |
| &lt;88                    | 37  | 8,743.16 | 9,963.54 | 5,867.00 | 7,136.50 |            |
| 88 - 90                | 12  | 4,650.80 | 3,283.92 | 4,171.00 | 5,667.00 |            |
| &gt;90                    | 112 | 6,088.60 | 5,149.05 | 4,854.00 | 5,180.75 |            |

Wilcoxon test.

Figure 2. Analysis through the ROC curve (Receiver Operating Characteristic) demonstrating the sensitivity and speci /uniFB01 city of D-dimer, GSH and ROS between survivors and non-survivors.

<!-- image -->

phosphate oxidase (NADPH) complex [13]. Nonetheless, the increase in ROS may be associated with an imbalance in redox homeostasis, signi /uniFB01 cantly contributing to the worsening of COVID-19 and with varying symptoms from mild to critical [13,22,23].

It was also observed that critically ill patients hospitalized the ICU had signi /uniFB01 cantly higher values for D-dimer markers. Nonetheless, changes in relation to D-dimer can be predictors of severity and re /uniFB02 ect in poor prognosis, mainly associated with thrombotic events [24]. A prospective cohort study demonstrated a 10% increase in mortality risk for every 10% increase in interleukin (IL) -6 or D-dimer levels [22].

In recent years, some biomarkers of in /uniFB02 ammation and systemic coagulation have become available in the main analyzers of laboratory tests and can help in terms of tracking and detecting the severity of the disease [25]. It was found that there were high D-dimer levels in critically ill patients, just as the Chinese retrospective study showed that D-dimer levels showed higher values at the time of hospital admission in those patients who evolved to a severe or critical illness and required intensive treatment [26]. During the pandemic, other markers indicating the severity of COVID-19 deserve to be highlighted: procalcitonin, serum ferritin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and IL-6. Measuring in /uniFB02 ammatory markers can help in terms of monitoring and evaluating severity and prognosis [27].

GSH is the most abundant non-enzymatic antioxidant found in airway epithelial lining /uniFB02 uid and acts as a vital intra and extracellular antioxidant, protecting against oxidative/nitrosative stress and interceding in pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory processes in the lungs [8,28]. However, this study did not show relevance of values between gender, hospitalization sector and days before hospitalization. There was a slight discharge only in relation to hospitalized aged between 18 and 59 years. Scienti /uniFB01 c evidence indicates that the increase in bodily GSH could also contribute to reducing the number of critically ill patients, while low levels of GSH could contribute to increasing the clinical severity of patients a /uniFB00 ected by SARS-COV-2 due to the increase of free radicals (ROS) [29,30].

It was observed a mean age of 59.4 years, a predominance of males in 52.4%, a frequency of death of 43% and a mean time of 6.42 days from the onset of symptoms to hospitalization. Viral infection stimulates the generation of elevated levels of ROS that disrupt redox homeostasis and elicit oxidative stress and in /uniFB02 ammation, biological responses closely related to disease aggravation [30]. A study carried out with 710 patients in China with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia found 52 patients in critical condition. Of these, 32 (61.5%) died at

28 days, and the median duration from ICU admission to death was 7 days for non-survivors. Compared to survivors, non-survivors were older, with a mean age of 64.6 years [21].

Finally, ROS and D-dimer presented a relationship, since they were associated with an increased risk of needing to be hospitalized in the ICU. This relationship appear, once, the immune response leads to excessive production and accumulation of ROS, that cause clinical signs characteristic of COVID-19, such as decreased oxygen saturation, vasoconstriction, elevated cytokines, alteration of hemoglobin properties, cardiac and/or renal injury and enhanced D-dimer [32], that re /uniFB02 ects poor prognosis, mainly associated with thrombotic events [24].

Biomarkers may collaborate in terms of detecting and monitoring parameters linked to oxidative stress in SARSCoV-2 infected patients. It was sought to /uniFB01 nd evidence correlating ROS, but further investigations and future studies are of extreme relevance. It is concluded that elevated ROS and Ddimer may contribute to worse outcomes in critically ill patients, demonstrating potential speci /uniFB01 city and sensitivity as predictors of poor outcome upon admission.

## Study limitations

Our results should not be extrapolated to the general population, because the patients who entered this hospital unit were probably admitted at di /uniFB00 erent stages of the disease, and it is not possible to establish a causal relationship due to the study design.

Furthermore, the patient samples obtained to perform the analysis were only whole blood and not plasma and PBMCs, samples usually used to apply the methodology here performed.

## Acknowledgements

All authors contributed equally to the writing and preparation of the manuscript. All authors approved the /uniFB01 nal version of the manuscript.

## Disclosure statement

No potential con /uniFB02 ict of interest was reported by the author(s).

## Funding

The author(s) reported there is no funding associated with the work featured in this article.

## ORCID

Claudionei Roessler http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6594-0963 Karen Cristine Silva de Oliveira http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6092-4788 Auricélia Xavier de Oliveira Portella http://orcid.org/0000-0001-50382471

Paulo Cezar Nunes Fortes http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8331-2410 Franciéle Romero Machadoo http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3574-2595 Stífani Machado Araujo http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7743-2595 Marina Prigol http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9724-7469 Léia Carolina Lucio http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8094-4188 Dalila Moter Benvegnú http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3419-9674 Lirane Elize Defante Ferreto http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0757-3659

## References

- [1] Raman R, Patel KJ, Ranjan K. COVID-19: unmasking emerging SARSCoV-2 variants, vaccines and therapeutic strategies. Biomolecules. 2021;11(7):993 -1023. doi:10.3390/biom11070993
- [2] Aleem A, Akbar Samad AB, Slenker AK. Emerging variants of SARSCoV-2 and novel therapeutics against coronavirus (COVID-19). In: StatPearls. Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing; 2022. PMID: 34033342.
- [3] Tsermpini EE, Glamo lija U, Ulucan-Karnak F, et al. Molecular mechč anisms related to responses to oxidative stress and antioxidative therapies in COVID-19: a systematic review. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022;11(8):1004 -1007. doi:10.3390/antiox11081609
- [4] Shang W, Dong J, Ren Y, et al. The value of clinical parameters in predicting the severity of COVID-19. J Med Virol. 2020;92 (10):2188 -2192. doi:10.1002/jmv.26031
- [5] Di Marco F, Foti G, Corsico AG. Where are we with the use of N-acetylcysteine as a preventive and adjuvant treatment for COVID-19? Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2022;26(2):715 -721. doi:10.26355/ eurrev\_202201\_27898
- [6] Guloyan V, Oganesian B, Baghdasaryan N, et al. Glutathione supplementation as an adjunctive therapy in COVID-19. Antioxidants (Basel). 2020;9(10):914), doi:10.3390/antiox9100914
- [7] Polonikov A. Endogenous de /uniFB01 ciency of glutathione as the most likely cause of serious manifestations and death in COVID-19 patients. ACS Infect Dis. 2020;6(7):1558 -1562. doi:10.1021/ acsinfecdis.0c00288
- [8] Cecchini R, Cecchini AL. SARS-CoV-2 infection pathogenesis is related to oxidative stress as a response to aggression. Med Hypotheses. 2020;143:110102), doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110102
- [9] Forman HJ, Zhang H, Rinna A. Glutathione: Overview of its protective roles, measurement, and biosynthesis. Mol Aspects Med. 2009;30(1-2):1 -12. doi:10.1016/j.mam.2008.08.006
- [10] Galli F, Marcantonini G, Giustarini D, et al. How aging and oxidative stress in /uniFB02 uence the cytopathic and in /uniFB02 ammatory e /uniFB00 ects of SARSCoV-2 infection: The role of cellular glutathione and cysteine metabolism. Antioxidants. 2022;11:1366), doi:10.3390/ antiox11071366
- [11] Bartolini D, Stabile AM, Bastianelli S, et al. SARS-CoV2 infection impairs the metabolism and redox function of cellular glutathione. Redox Biol. 2021;45:102041), doi:10.1016/j.redox.2021.102041
- [12] Coronel PMV, Pereira IC, Basilio DCLS, et al. Biomarkers of oxidative stress and in /uniFB02 ammation in subjects with COVID-19: Characterization and prognosis of the disease. Microb Pathog.2023; 184:106339), doi:10.1016/j.micpath.2023.106339
- [13] Silvagno F, Vernone A, Pescarmona GP. The role of glutathione in protecting against the severe in /uniFB02 ammatory response triggered by COVID-19. Antioxidants (Basel). 2020;9(7):624), doi:10.3390/ antiox9070624
- [14] Gadotti AC, Lipinski AL, Vasconcellos FT, et al. Susceptibility of the patients infected with Sars-Cov2 to oxidative stress and possible interplay with severity of the disease. Free Radic Biol Med. 2021;165:184 -190. doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2021.01. 044
- [15] Delgado-Roche L, Mesta F. Oxidative stress as Key player in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) infection. ArchMed Res. 2020;51(5):384 -387. doi:10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.04. 019
- [16] Loetchutinat C, Kothan S, Dechsupa S, et al. Spectro /uniFB02 uorometric determination of intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species in drug-sensitive and drug-resistant cancer cells using the 2 ,7 -' ' dichloro /uniFB02 uorescein diacetate assay. Radiat Phys Chem. 2005;72(23):323 -331. doi:10.1016/j.radphyschem.2004.06.011
- [17] Ellman GL. Tissue sulfhydryl groups. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1959;82 (1):70 -77. doi:10.1016/0003-9861(59)90090-6
- [18] Youden WJ. Index for rating diagnostic tests. Cancer. 1950;3(1):32 -35. doi:10.1002/1097-0142(1950)3:1&lt;32::AID-CNCR2820030106&gt;3. 0.CO;2-3
- [19] de Almeida Juliana O, de Oliveira Victoria Regina T, Lucas dos SAJ, et al. COVID-19: physiopathology and targets for therapeutic intervention. Rev Virtual Quim. 2020;12(6):1464 -1497. doi:10.21577/ 1984-6835.20200115
- [20] Veenith T, Martin H, Le Breuilly M, et al. High generation of reactive oxygen species from neutrophils in patients with severe COVID-19. Sci Rep. 2022;12:10484), doi:10.1038/s41598-022-13825-7
- 6 C. ROESSLER ET AL.
- [21] Wiecz /uniFB01 nska J, Kleniewska P, Pawliczak R. Oxidative stress-related mechanisms in SARS-CoV-2 infections. Oxid MednCellLongev. 2022;2022:5589089. doi: 10.1155/2022/5589089
- [22] Alam MS, Czajkowsky DM. SARS-CoV-2 infection and oxidative stress: Pathophysiological insight into thrombosis and therapeutic opportunities. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2022;63:44 -57. doi:10. 1016/j.cytogfr.2021.11.001
- [23] Yuki K, Fujiogi M, Koutsogiannaki S. COVID-19 pathophysiology: A review. Clin Immunol. 2020;215:108427), doi:10.1016/j.clim.2020. 108427
- [24] Rocha MEG, Chagas VM, Carvalho LG, et al. D-dímero elevado em pacientes com COVID-19: relato de um seguimento clínico e laboratorial em 6 casos con /uniFB01 rmados [Elevated D-dimer in patients with covid-19: report of a clinical and laboratory follow-up in 6 con /uniFB01 rmed cases]. Hematol Transfus Cell Ther. 2020;42:528 -529. doi:10.1016/j.htct.2020.10.892
- [25] Bruno LC, Soares JAH, Lelis ESDS, et al. Dímero-d como importante marcador para estrati /uniFB01 car a gravidade da infecção pelo novo coronavírus: revisão sistemática da literatura [D-Dimer as an important marker To stratify the severity of infection by the new coronavirus: systematic literature review]. Hematol Transfus Cell Ther. 2020;42:530 -531. doi:10.1016/j.htct.2020.10. 895
- [26] Fleury MK. A COVID-19 e o laboratório de hematologia: uma revisão da literatura recente [COVID-19 and the hematology laboratory: a recent literature review]. Rev Bras Anal Clin. 2020;52(2). doi:10. 21877/2448-3877.20200003
- [27] Zeng F, Huang Y, Guo Y, et al. Association of in /uniFB02 ammatory markers with the severity of COVID-19: a meta-analysis. Int J Infect Dis. 2020;96:467 -474. doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2020.05.055
- [28] Voskresenska N, Voicehovska J, Babikovs S, et al. Glutathione level in community-acquired pneumonia patients. Eur J Respir. 2017;50:PA988.
- [29] Horowitz RI, Freeman PR, Bruzzese J. E /uniFB03 cacy of glutathione therapy in relieving dyspnea associated with COVID-19 pneumonia: A report of 2 cases. Respir Med Case Rep. 2020;30:101063. doi: 10. 1016/j.rmcr.2020.101063
- [30] Vardakas P, Skaperda Z, Tekos F, et al. ROS and COVID. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022;11(2):339. doi: 10.3390/antiox11020339
- [31] Yang J, Zheng Y, Gou X, et al. Prevalence of comorbidities and its e /uniFB00 ects in patients infected with SARS-CoV-2: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Infect Dis. 2020;94:91 -95. doi:10.1016/j. ijid.2020.03.017
- [32] Camp Olivia G, Bai D, Gonullu Damla C Melatonin interferes with COVID-19 at several distinct ROS-related steps. J Inorg Biochem. 2021;223:111546. doi:10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2021.111546