<!-- image -->

## ORIGINAL ARTICLE

## Changes in Neutrophil Metabolism upon Activation and Aging

Barbara Christine Richer, 1 Natallia Salei, 2,3 Tamás Laskay, 2 and Karsten Seeger 1,4

Abstract -Neutrophil activation is an important mechanism of host defense against pathogens. Chronic inflammation and autoimmunity are often associated with abnormalities in phenotype and functions of neutrophils. Since effector functions of immune cells during inflammation are tightly linked to their metabolic state, changes in neutrophil metabolome upon activation have been investigated in this study. Human neutrophils from healthy blood donors ( n = 6) were treated either with tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα ) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS), whereas untreated neutrophils were used as control. Since apoptotic cells are abundant at sites of inflammation, the metabolome of aged, mainly apoptotic neutrophils was analyzed too. NMR spectroscopy of water-soluble metabolites revealed a clear distinction between aged neutrophils and neutrophils in control and activated samples. Higher levels of NAD + (4- to 9fold) and lower levels of ATP (0.3-fold), glutathione (0.8-fold), hypotaurine (0.8-fold), and phosphocholine (0.6-fold) were detected in aged neutrophils than in the other samples. Differences in metabolic profiles between LPS and TNFα -stimulated cells as well as between stimulated and control neutrophils were statistically not significant. Replication with additional six blood donors confirmed increased NAD + levels in aged cells compared to activated and control neutrophils.

KEY WORDS: neutrophils; activation; apoptosis; metabolomics; NMR; energy state.

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s10753-017-0725-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Abbreviations ANOVA,Analysis of variance; ATP, Adenosine 5 -triphos-' phate; ADP, Adenosine 5 -diphosphate; FDR, False discovery rate; LPS, ' Lipopolysaccharide; NAD , Nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide; NMR, + Nuclear magnetic resonance; ROS, Reactive oxygen species; STOCSY, Statistical total correlation spectroscopy; PC, Principal component; PCA, Principal component analysis; PCho, Phosphocholine; PLD, Phospholipase D,; PLS, Partial least square; TNFα , Tumor necrosis factor α ; TSP d 4 , (Trimethylsilyl)propanoic acid,

## INTRODUCTION

Neutrophils play a pivotal role in host immune defense against pathogens. Dysregulation or defects of neutrophil function can cause severe outcomes like sepsis [1] or autoimmune diseases [2]. Neutrophils can exert several antimicrobial functions ranging from phagocytosis and release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) to the formation of extracellular traps [3 -5] to kill bacteria. Neutrophils have a short life span and they undergo constitutive apoptosis within few hours [6 -8]. Although activated neutrophils are pro-inflammatory, apoptotic neutrophils play a major role in the resolution of inflammation [9, 10]. The metabolic changes in neutrophils during activation and apoptosis are poorly understood.

Neutrophils contain only few mitochondria [11] which have been found to form an extensive network in

the cytoplasm [12]. Inhibition of mitochondrial function does not affect ATP levels in neutrophils [11, 13]. It was found that ATP in neutrophils is formed during glycolysis [13] although they also contain an entire citric acid cycle [14]. During phagocytosis, the glycolysis rate remains constant but the intracellular concentration of ATP decreases [13]. ATP has also another important role for neutrophil function. Upon activation, neutrophils release ATP that participates in nucleotide signaling [15].

In a very early study, it was found that in apoptotic neutrophils, compared to freshly isolated neutrophils, the levels of only few amino acids, phosphocholine (PCho) and lactate were significantly changed [16]. Other metabolites like taurine, which is highly abundant in neutrophils with a concentration of about 50 mM [17], or the adenosine 5 -triphosphate/adenosine 5 -diphosphate (ATP/ADP) ratio ' ' were found to be not altered in this study [16].

Since these existing studies have examined different metabolic changes of different functions, the question was raised whether there are common metabolic changes or if the differences are characteristic for each cellular state. To address this question, we determined metabolic profiles of aged, mainly apoptotic neutrophils as well as activated neutrophils and compared it with untreated neutrophils. Two different activating stimuli, tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα ) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), have been investigated in order to see whether different signaling pathways affect metabolism differentially. Water-soluble metabolites have been isolated from neutrophils of six individuals and subsequently analyzed by high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. NMR spectroscopy is very effective for determination of metabolic profiles [18]. Although it is less sensitive than mass spectrometry, it shows several advantages such as it is a non-destructive method. NMR spectroscopy allows a purely untargeted analysis, i.e., hypothesis-free analysis of metabolites and also provides structural information in case of unassigned signals. Metabolic profiles of the extracts have been determined by NMR spectroscopy and subsequently analyzed with different statistical methods allowing discrimination of aged neutrophils from controls and activated neutrophils. In order to validate the findings, we repeated the experiments with a second group of six individuals. Reproducible observations were the higher lactate levels in activated neutrophils as well as the higher levels of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD + ) and lower levels of ATP, ADP, and PCho in aged neutrophils.

These results point towards different energy demands and alterations in signaling pathways in different functional states of neutrophils. Our findings also pave the way

for targeted metabolomic studies of changes in neutrophil metabolism that are associated with dysfunction of neutrophils or diseases.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Ethics Statement and Experimental Strategy

Blood collection was conducted with written agreement of each participant and was approved by the Ethical Committee of the Medical Faculty of the University of Lübeck (05-124). All donors were female between 22 and 63 years olds. All participants claimed that they are healthy. In the first part of this study, neutrophils of six donors were analyzed. These samples are designated as batch 1. The mean age of these donors was 35.3 ± 16.2 years with a median age of 27.5 years. To validate the findings and to identify batch effects, we repeated the experiment with a second group of six individuals, referred to as batch 2 (Fig. 1). In batch 2, the mean age was 29.1 ± 6.05 years with a median age of 26.5 years.

The experimental strategy is provided in Fig. 1. Isolated neutrophils of each donor were split in four groups and cultured either alone (control group) or stimulated with TNFα or LPS. A fourth group was allowed to undergo aging thereby representing mainly apoptotic cells.

## Neutrophil Isolation and Activation

Peripheral blood was collected by venipuncture from adult female volunteers in lithium-heparin-containing tubes. Neutrophils were isolated using Percoll gradient centrifugation as described previously [19, 20]. The purity of granulocytes was &gt; 99.9% as determined by morphological examination of cytocentrifuge slides stained with Diff Quik (Medion Diagnostics, Düdingen, Switzerland). After isolation, neutrophils were re-suspended in complete medium, namely RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) supplemented with 10% heatinactivated fetal calf serum (Sigma-Aldrich), 4 mM Lglutamine, 10 mM HEPES, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μ g/ml streptomycin (all from Biochrom, Berlin, Germany). Isolated neutrophils were split in four groups and cultured either alone (control group) or stimulated with 100 ng/ml TNFα or 100 ng/ml LPS for 30 min at 37 °C in humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. This time frame was used since neutrophils stimulated with TNFα show a peak of ROS production after 30 min. In addition, this is also the time commonly used for pretreatment of neutrophils with LPS [21, 22]. The last group was

Fig. 1. Experimental strategy employed to analyze metabolic changes in neutrophils upon activation and aging. Initially, neutrophils of six donors were isolated. Typically 80 × 10 6 neutrophils have been isolated from each donor and subsequently divided into four groups. Metabolites were extracted with chloroform/methanol and the recorded NMR spectra were subjected to statistical analysis. Data of this cohort are herein after referred to as batch 1 ( a ). Independent replication of this experiment was performed to identify changes in metabolism that are likely arising due to batch effects. Results of the replication are termed batch 2 ( b ).

<!-- image -->

incubated at 37 °C for apoptosis induction in humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 for 30 h, the time point at which the maximum percentage of apoptotic cells is observed. Apoptosis rate was determined by annexin VFLUOS (Roche Molecular Biologicals, Mannheim, Germany) and propidium iodide (Sigma-Aldrich) staining and analyzed by flow cytometry. After the incubations 20 × 10 6 neutrophils from each group were washed two times with PBS and frozen at -80 °C until metabolite extraction.

## Metabolite Extraction

Metabolites were extracted with chloroform/methanol which is very well suited for subsequent analysis with NMR spectroscopy [23]. Isolation was performed as described previously [24]. In brief, cell pellets were dissolved in cold 900 μ l chloroform/methanol (600 μ l chloroform + 300 μ l methanol) and mixed extensively for 5 min. The mix was sonicated four times for 3 s on ice. Nine hundred microliters of water saturated with chloroform was added. After mixing, it was centrifuged for 20 min at 4 °C and 16,000 g . One milliliter of the upper water-soluble fraction (1.2 ml) was collected to avoid carryover of precipitated macromolecules. For calculation of the taurine concentration, this has been accounted for. The samples were vacuum dried and dissolved in 180 μ l 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer, 0.1 mM (trimethylsilyl)propanoic acid

(TSPd 4 ), pH 7.4 in D2O. A detailed description of the metabolite isolation can be found in [25].

## Acquisition of NMR spectra

NMR experiments were recorded on a Bruker DRX 500 Avance III spectrometer with a cryo probe at 298 K. The software TopSpin 3.1 and higher was used for data acquisition and processing. Proton spectra were recorded by using the standard Bruker pulse sequence noesypr1d with suppression of the residual water signal during the relaxation delay and mixing time. Spectra were acquired with 512 scans and 42 k data points per free induction decay. A relaxation delay of 3 s and a mixing time of 0.1 s were applied and a spectral width of 12 ppm was used.

## Pretreatment of data before analysis

A double zero filling was applied to all spectra. The free induction decay was multiplied with an e-function with a line broadening value of 1 Hz. The 1 HNMRspectra were manually phased, baseline corrected, and referenced to the main signal of TSPd 4 . Regions containing the signals of water (4.54 -5.2 ppm), chloroform (7.66 -7.72 ppm), DMSO (2.725 2.75 ppm), methanol (3.313 --3.382 ppm), ethanol (1.214 -1.16 ppm, 3.616 -3.695 ppm), and TSPd 4 ( -0.2 -0.2 ppm) were excluded before subsequent data analysis. As few samples contained an impurity of

Table 1. Significant Changes in Metabolite Levels between the Different Groups

|                                | -values of metabolic changes 1 control  vs. aged TNF vs.  aged LPS vs.  aged   | -values of metabolic changes 1 control  vs. aged TNF vs.  aged LPS vs.  aged   | -values of metabolic changes 1 control  vs. aged TNF vs.  aged LPS vs.  aged   | -values of metabolic changes 1 control  vs. aged TNF vs.  aged LPS vs.  aged   | -values of metabolic changes 1 control  vs. aged TNF vs.  aged LPS vs.  aged   |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| metabolite                     | control                                                                        | control                                                                        |                                                                                |                                                                                |                                                                                |
| (signal range in ppm)          | vs. TNF                                                                        | vs. LPS                                                                        |                                                                                |                                                                                |                                                                                |
| alanine (1.4718 - 1.502)       | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 8.57 E-3  (1.11) 7                                                             | 4.05E-4  (1.14) 7                                                              | 2.27 E-3  (1.13) (1.23)                                                        |
| acetate (1.9091 - 1.9302)      | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 9.27 E-6  (1.41)                                                               | 3.18 E-4 (1.30)                                                                | 6.09 E-3                                                                       |
| ATP and ADP 2 (8.268 - 8.286)  | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 5.52 E-9  (0.39)                                                               | 8.70 E-9 (0.40)                                                                | 8.49 E-9 (0.39)                                                                |
| ADP 2 (8.541 - 8.543)          | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 0.013  (0.45)                                                                  | -                                                                              |
| ATP 2 (8.546 - 8.548)          | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 6.42 E-3  (0.32)                                                               | 0.021  (0.35)                                                                  | 4.00 E-4  (0.27)                                                               |
| choline (3.205 - 3.2172)       | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 3.19 E-3  (1.72)  7                                                            | -                                                                              | 0.048 (1.45) 7                                                                 |
| glutamine (2.4289 - 2.4892)    | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 2.58 E-6  (1.54)                                                               | 2.64 E-5 (1.45)                                                                | 2.33 E-5 (1.47)                                                                |
| glutathione (2.4892 - 2.6307)  | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 2.44 E-3  (0.84)  7                                                            | 2.03 E-5 (0.79)                                                                | 1.03 E-4  (0.80) 7                                                             |
| glycine (3.5588 - 3.5742)      |                                                                                | -                                                                              | 1.22 E-3  (1.32) 7                                                             | 4.95 E-3 (1.27) 7                                                              | 0.010 7                                                                        |
| GTP (8.151 - 8.1637)           | - -                                                                            | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | (1.25) 0.060  7                                                                |
| hypotaurine (2.6307 -          |                                                                                |                                                                                | 5.85 E-5                                                                       | 2.88 E-6                                                                       | (0.59) 5.20 E-6                                                                |
| 2.6752) isoleucine 3 (0.9857 - | - -                                                                            | - -                                                                            | (0.78) 0.070                                                                   | (0.75) 0.020                                                                   | (0.75) 0.011                                                                   |
| 1.0676)                        | 4.34 E-5                                                                       | 4.59 E-3                                                                       | (1.10)  7                                                                      | (1.12) 7                                                                       | (1.13) 7                                                                       |
| lactate (1.317 - 1.35)         | (1.62)                                                                         | (1.44) 8                                                                       | -                                                                              | 5.68 E-7 (0.52)                                                                | 9.04E-5 (0.58)                                                                 |
| NAD + (9.330 - 9.3525)         | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 3.77 E-9  (7.3)                                                                | 3.77 E-9 (4.22)                                                                | 3.77 E-9 (9.43)                                                                |
| NADPH (9.271 - 9.321) 4        | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 2.36 E-3  (2.19) 7                                                             | -                                                                              | 0.064 (1.60) 7                                                                 |
| PCho (3.2169 - 3.231)          | 1.47 E-3  (1.25) 7                                                             | -                                                                              | 5.69 E-5  (0.69)                                                               | 3.89 E-9 (0.55)                                                                | 1.13 E-7 (0.61)                                                                |
| taurine (3.3923 - 3.4525)      | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 0.019  (0.81)                                                                  | 1.71 E-4 (0.74) 7                                                              | 2.98 E-4  (0.74) 7                                                             |
| tyrosine (7.1831 - 7.213)      | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 3.26 E-3  (1.33)  7                                                            | 0.074 (1.20) 7                                                                 | 4.82 E-3 (1.32)                                                                |
| unknown 5 (1.057 - 1.079)      | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 5.30 E-3  (1.23)  7                                                            | 3.60 E-3 (1.24) 7                                                              | 0.029 (1.18) 7                                                                 |
| unknown (1.1 - 1.12)           | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 0.029 (1.21) 7                                                                 |                                                                                |
| unknown 6 (2.3995 - 2.4289)    | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 7.23 E-5 (1.29)                                                                | 1.96 E-4 (1.27)                                                                | - 2.77 E-4                                                                     |
| unknown (2.7921 - 2.8087)      | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 0.034  (1.37)                                                                  | 0.042 (1.36) 8                                                                 | (1.27) 0.029  (1.39) 8                                                         |
| unknown (3.0372 -              | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | 0.021  (1.46)  8                                                               | 0.022 (1.46) 8                                                                 | 0.035 (1.43)                                                                   |
| 3.0425)                        |                                                                                |                                                                                | 4.44 E-4  (1.82)  7                                                            | 8.61 E-4 (1.75)                                                                | 1.06 E-3 (1.76)                                                                |
| unknown (3.065 - 3.08)         | -                                                                              | -                                                                              |                                                                                |                                                                                |                                                                                |
| unknown (7.4111 - 7.4422)      | - -                                                                            | - -                                                                            | 4.38 E-3  (1.44)  8                                                            | 0.025 (1.34) 0.069                                                             | 0.050 (1.30)                                                                   |
| unknown (7.945 - 7.9602)       |                                                                                |                                                                                | - 0.065                                                                        | (0.79) 7 0.020                                                                 | -                                                                              |
| unknown (8.235 - 8.2456)       | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | (1.69)  7                                                                      | (1.95) 7                                                                       | 2.40 E-3 (2.65) 7                                                              |
| unknown (8.5833 -              |                                                                                |                                                                                |                                                                                | 0.041 7                                                                        | 8.31 E-3                                                                       |
|                                | -                                                                              | -                                                                              | -                                                                              |                                                                                | 7                                                                              |
| 8.5972)                        |                                                                                |                                                                                |                                                                                | (1.89)                                                                         | (2.42)                                                                         |

Changes in metabolite levels where considered for further analysis when the p value in an ANOVA of the combined batches was smaller than 0.05. Also, changes with p &lt;0.075 are provided as in these cases are often significant changes in one batch are observed. Analysis of the two individual batches is provided in Supplemental Table S1. Comparison of the two groups of activated neutrophils is omitted for clarity as there are no significant changes observed. To account for multiple testing, an FDR was subsequently performed. As it is difficult to estimate the number of detectable metabolites in the spectra, FDR was done with three different variables, i.e , 50, 100, and 200. Metabolite changes that are significant after FDR are labeled in light gray (for 50 variables), . dark gray (100 variables), and light green (for 200 variables). Fold changes in metabolite levels compared to control neutrophils are given in parentheses 1 p values for significant changes (FDR adjusted α ) for the individual groups are provided in the experimental section

Fig. 2. Annotated 500 MHz NMR spectra of water soluble metabolites extracted from 20 million neutrophils. NMR spectra of a representative extract from control ( a ), TNFα -treated ( b ), and LPS-treated ( c ), and aged, mainly apoptotic ( d ) neutrophils are dominated by taurine resonances. A detailed view of the region showing signals of nucleotides is given in Fig. 4. Amino acids and nucleotides are marked by their three letter code. Cr = creatinine, ac = acetate, lac = lactate, Glc = glucose, PCho = phosphocholine, Cho = choline. HDO is the suppressed residual water signal.

<!-- image -->

unknown origin, the regions (7.458 -7.67 and 5.86 -5.91 ppm) have been removed before analysis giving a total of 27,945 variables and a resolution of 0.3 ppb ( -1 to 10 ppm). Spectra were subsequently normalized to median spectrum and automatically horizontally aligned [26 -28].

## Data Analysis

Data analysis was performed with each batch individually as well as with both batches combined. Principal component analysis was performed using the MATLAB pca function. Variables of interest were identified in loading plots. Since a partial least square (PLS) analysis did not allow to discriminate the different groups, metabolites that could be identified in the spectra and well-separated peaks were analyzed individually. The normalized spectral regions were integrated and used to calculate p values with the anova1 function of MATLAB (R2015b).

Correcting for multiple testing was done according to Benjamini and Hochberg [29]. Since metabolites usually show signals in different bins it is difficult to adjust the number of variables appropriately. We, therefore, performed a false discovery rate (FDR) with 50, 100, and 200 as an estimate of detectable metabolites present in the samples. The adjusted α values after FDR are for control vs . TNFα treated neutrophils: 2.5 E-4 (200 metabolites), 5 E-4 (100 metabolites), and 2 E-3 (50 metabolites); for control vs . LPS-treated neutrophils: 2.5 E-4 (200 metabolites), 5 E-4 (100 metabolites), and 1 E-3 (50 metabolites); for control vs . aged neutrophils: 3.75 E-3 (200 metabolites), 9.5 E-3 (100 metabolites), and 0.022 (50 metabolites); for TNFα treated vs. aged neutrophils: 3.75 E-3 (200 metabolites), 8 E-3 (100 metabolites), and 0.023 (50 metabolites); and for LPS vs . aged neutrophils: 4 E-3 (200 metabolites), 9.5 E-3 (100 metabolites), and 0.021 (50 metabolites).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. PCA analysis of neutrophils ' metabolic profiles of different cellular states for both investigated batches. PCA analysis shows a clear separation of aged, mainly apoptotic neutrophils from the control group and activated neutrophils of samples for both batches. This is achieved by a combination of PC1 and PC2 as seen in the score plot ( a, b ). Discrimination of the two groups of activated neutrophils and the controls is less clear although a trend can be seen for batch 1. Loading plots of the first two principal components are shown for batch 1 ( c ) and batch 2 ( d ), respectively. Loading plots allow identification of resonances contributing to the discrimination, e.g., ATP , NAD + , glutathione taurine, and lactate. Open symbols in the score plots represent the individual samples. Filled squares in the corresponding colors are the mean of each group. Ellipsoids are plotted at two times the standard deviation for the respective group.

<!-- image -->

Statistical total correlation spectroscopy (STOCSY) analysis has been performed according to [30, 31].

## Identification of metabolites

Metabolites were assigned using reference spectra previously recorded [32, 33]. For selected resonances, a STOCSYanalysis was performed in order to obtain information which other signals might belong to the metabolite, thus, serving as a starting point for metabolite identification [30]. This approach was used for validation of metabolite

assignment, e.g., for hypotaurine or glutathione. To improve and verify the assignment spiking was done as described in [25].

## RESULTS

Metabolic profiles of activated, aged (mainly apoptotic), and control neutrophils have been determined. Subsequent statistical analysis was used to determine changes in

Fig. 4. Region of the NMR spectra showing resonances of NAD , adenine, and guanosine nucleotides. All six NMR spectra of each group from batch 1 are + overlaid. Comparison of control neutrophils ( a ), TNFα -treated ( b ), and LPS-treated ( c ) and aged neutrophils ( d ) is showing a clear increase of NAD + signals in aged neutrophils ( d ) and changes in the ATP and ADP levels for activated neutrophils ( b c , ). Colors are as in Fig. 3 and spectra are scaled. An expanded region of the ADP and ATP signals at 8.55 ppm is given in supplemental Fig. S3.

<!-- image -->

metabolite levels that are associated with the different cellular states.

## Spectra and Metabolic Profiles of the Different Samples

By a chloroform/methanol extraction water-soluble metabolites and hydrophobic molecules, i.e., lipids are separated. Since lipids are difficult to investigate by NMR spectroscopy, only water-soluble metabolites have been subsequently analyzed. NMR spectra of watersoluble metabolites extracted from 20 million neutrophils show a very good signal to noise ratio (Fig. 2). The spectra show very intense signals arising from taurine (3.25 -3.45 ppm), lactate, and acetate while in the aromatic region of the spectra, resonances of nucleotides are dominating. There are no detectable signals of activated sugars in the anomeric region (5.1 -5.8 ppm). NAD + signals are hardly detectable in spectra of the control group and in activated neutrophils, but can be clearly identified in aged neutrophils. Three samples from batch 1 show divergent peak intensities, especially for ATP, ADP, and formic acid,

compared to the other samples of the respective groups. This could be related to certain technical difficulties encountered during the extraction of these particular samples showing finally lower levels of ATP, ADP, and formic acid.

## Principal Component Analysis

A principal component analysis was used to investigate whether there are differences in the metabolic profiles of activated, aged, and control neutrophils. Discrimination of the four groups was achieved by a combination of principal component (PC) 1 and PC2 for both batches (Fig. 3). For the first batch, most of the variance of the samples is explained by PC1 (76.5%) and PC2 (7.7%). In case of the second batch, PC1 accounts for 62.0% and PC2 for 14.3% of total variance. In higher PCs, only clustering of the individual neutrophil donors was seen thereby allowing discrimination of the different blood donors. For the first batch, aged neutrophils clearly separate from control and activated neutrophils (Fig. 3a). For batch 2,

Fig. 5. Identification of metabolites that are correlated with NAD + . A STOCSYplot was used to identify resonances that show a high correlation coefficient with the NAD + signal at 9.342 ppm ( ↓ , H2 of the nicotine amide moiety). Metabolites like glutamine or glycine are changed likewise NAD + as seen by positive signals in the STOCSYplot whereas metabolites, for example ATP, that are inversely correlated with NAD + are represented as negative peaks in the spectrum. Although taurine shows very prominent negative signals, these are barely correlated with changes in NAD . Peaks that show correlation with + NAD + but which could not be assigned are labeled with * (1.943 -1.963 ppm) and ** (3.074 ppm). Abbreviations of metabolites are as in Fig. 2.

<!-- image -->

metabolic profiles of aged neutrophils were distinct from the other three groups, although discrimination was not as clear as for batch 1. Moreover, the data in batch 2 showed a higher degree of variance as compared to batch 1. The midpoints, i.e , the mean values of control group, TNF-. α activated and LPS-activated neutrophils were different in batch 1. In batch 2, however, a higher variation in metabolic profiles is seen in the score plot resulting in lack of separation of activated and control neutrophils (Fig. 3b).

Analyzing both batches in one principal component analysis (PCA) shows also a clear separation of aged neutrophils from the other three groups (supplemental Fig. S1). The first principal component PC1 accounts for 63.6% and PC2 for 12.2% of total variance. Aged neutrophils are distinct from controls and activated neutrophils. The metabolic profiles of neutrophils activated with TNFα or LPS were similar and the different activation triggers cannot be discriminated. To avoid complication of analysis due to batch effect, both batches were kept separate for statistical analysis and only common changes were considered to be of significance.

## Changes in the Metabolic Profiles

Ametabolite was considered to be altered significantly when the p value of the region was less than 0.05 in an

analysis of variance (ANOVA) and below the adjusted α value after FDR (Table 1). As already seen in PCA (Fig. 3 and supplemental Fig. S1) there were no significant changes between neutrophils activated with TNFα and LPS. There were only a few significant changes of metabolites between the control group and activated neutrophils, e.g , PCho and . glycerophosphocholine which also seem to be batchdependent (supplemental Table 1). Most differences were observed between aged neutrophils and control and activated neutrophils in the other two samples. Metabolites that were distinct between these groups and that are showing increased levels in aged neutrophils are NAD + (4 -9-fold increase), choline (1.5-fold increase), and glycine (1.3fold increase), whereas ATP (0.3-fold decrease) and PCho (0.6-fold decrease) were present at lower levels in aged neutrophils. A complete listing of alterations in metabolite levels in aged or activated neutrophils compared to controls is provided in Table 1 and supplemental Table 1.

Appearance of NAD + signals in the spectrum is a very distinct feature of aged cells (Fig. 4), raising a question which other metabolites are correlated with increase of NAD + . This was addressed by a statistical total correlation spectroscopy (STOCSY) analysis. STOCSY analysis aids identification of varied metabolites and is complementary to the PCA loading plots [30]. A STOCSY

spectrum used to identify resonances correlated with NAD + is shown in Fig. 5. As expected, signals belonging to NAD + show a high correlation but also other metabolites like glycine, glutamine, two unknown resonances, and ATP.

## DISCUSSION

Metabolic pathways like glycolysis or the role of mitochondria for neutrophil function are very welldescribed in literature [13, 14, 16]. However, there is currently no study in a metabolomics setting for neutrophils available. Metabolic profiles for different cellular states of neutrophils determined by high-resolution NMR spectroscopy and subsequent statistical analysis show that the different cellular states are different in certain metabolites. Also, earlier findings of neutrophil metabolism could be reproduced and metabolites that have not been under scrutiny before, like NAD + , have been shown to be significantly altered.

## Induction of Apoptosis

Neutrophils have a short half-life in the circulation and undergo spontaneous apoptosis [34]. To analyze the metabolome of aged cells, neutrophils were incubated for 30 h to induce cell death program. As expected, most neutrophils (approx. 60%) underwent apoptosis. In addition, approximately 15% of neutrophils in culture were already necrotic (supplemental Fig. S2). Although the cell population is inhomogeneous, we estimate the impact on the results as minor. Since the different samples are compared with control, i.e , viable neutrophils, the presence of . viable neutrophils in the samples of aged neutrophils will attenuate the observed metabolic changes and therefore small changes in metabolism might be overseen. For the necrotic neutrophils, the situation is similar as these cells represent only one fourth of the apoptotic neutrophils.

## Changes in Metabolism of the Different Cellular States of Neutrophils

NMR spectra of water-soluble metabolites extracted from neutrophils show very intense taurine signals. Its concentration is decreased in aged neutrophils compared to activated neutrophils. Other metabolites that show lower concentrations in aged neutrophils are ATP and ADP, glutathione, hypotaurine, PCho, and taurine, respectively. Levels of NAD + and glutamine are increased in aged neutrophils compared to the other samples. Since taurine,

NAD + and ATP have not only intracellular but also extracellular effects on neutrophils they will be discussed in more detail.

## Taurine Is Reduced during Apoptosis

Taurine is very abundant in neutrophils with about 21 nmol per 10 6 cells which equals to an estimated cytosolic concentration of 50 mM [17]. Amounts of taurine found in our study are half the reported value with approximately 12 nmol per 10 6 cells corresponding to about 26 mM intracellular taurine. We observe a slight decrease of hypotaurine levels in aged neutrophils as reported by Green and colleagues [17] whereas in activated neutrophils, hypotaurine levels remain unchanged.

Taurine exerts an important role for neutrophil function and is taken up from blood [35]. Both, taurine and hypotaurine serve as antioxidants to prevent damage at sites of inflammation -in particular, they react with hypochlorous acid produced by neutrophilic myeloperoxidase forming N -chlorotaurine [36]. Addition of taurine to the drinking water of rats results in elevated blood taurine levels and isolated neutrophils show increased capacity for phagocytosis and bactericidal effect [37]. In a previous analysis of neutrophil metabolism, no significant change of taurine levels in apoptotic neutrophils was found [16] which could be due to the number of investigated samples in this study or due to batch effects. In our investigation, taurine is significantly decreased in aged, mainly apoptotic neutrophils. Since in apoptosis, contrary to NETosis or necrosis, the cellular membrane remains intact [38]. The decreased taurine levels are not a result of an unspecific leakage of taurine through the cell membrane. As the medium used for induction of apoptosis has not been analyzed for the presence of taurine, the fate of taurine is unknown. It remains unclear whether taurine has been released to the medium or if it has been metabolized inside the neutrophils.

## Increased Levels of NAD + during Apoptosis

The most marked difference in the NMR spectra of the different samples is the presence of increased levels of NAD + in aged neutrophils, which has not been reported before. In glycolysis and in the citric acid cycle, NADH is formed from NAD + . NADH is than oxidized in the respiratory chain reaction leading to the synthesis of ATP and reformation of NAD . Which contradicts increased + levels of NAD + as a result of increased energy demand are the decreased levels of ATP in aged neutrophils.

However, it could be that an increased ATP formation is counterbalanced by an increased ATP consumption. This hypothesis is supported by a work of Borregaard and Herlin [13], which found that the glycolysis rate remains constant during phagocytosis but the intracellular concentration of ATP decreases. Beside its role in energy metabolism, NAD + is also required as co-substrate by a class of histone deacetylases, the sirtuins. This class of enzymes has found widespread attention as modulators of epigenetic modifications [39]. It is tempting to speculate that NAD + might influence gene expression in neutrophils that are important for their function especially since sirtuins have been shown to be involved in apoptosis [40].

Since compounds that are involved in NAD + biosynthesis such as tryptophan, nicotine amide, or nicotinic acid were not detected in the neutrophil extracts, this raises the question of the origin of the additional NAD + . It should be noted that extracellular NAD + is delaying spontaneous apoptosis in human neutrophils [41] but NAD + also exerts an activating effect on neutrophils and other immune cells [42].

## ATPand ADP Show Decreased Levels in Aged Neutrophils

Interestingly, the level of ATP was decreased in aged neutrophils compared to control and activated neutrophils indicating an increased energy demand or decreased production during neutrophil apoptosis. It was recently found that neutrophils release ATP upon activation for autocrine purinergic signaling [43]. This ATP is generated by mitochondria; however, the overall intracellular ATP level remains constant upon activation [43]. Another study comparing apoptotic and freshly isolated neutrophils found that the ATP/ADP ratio is not changed [16]. This is in contradiction to our experiments where decreased ATP levels were measured in aged neutrophils. The reason for this discrepancy are very likely different time scales used.

## Other Metabolic Changes

Differences in metabolite levels between activated, control, and aged neutrophils were seen for some amino acids, choline and derivatives, lactate, and acetate. Lactate is the only compound showing batch-independent significant changes between control neutrophils compared to aged neutrophils. The higher lactate levels in activated neutrophils could point towards an increased energy demand in activated neutrophils. However, it is not clear so far whether lactate production is increased or secretion to the extracellular space is reduced in activated neutrophils.

Most changes in metabolite levels were found in aged neutrophils (Table 1). Some of these changes are in opposite direction than reported in a previous study of apoptotic and control neutrophils [16] and are probably due to different study design or indicating batch effects. Decrease of PCho levels in aged neutrophils might reflect membrane rearrangements that accompany apoptosis [44]. Another explanation could be related to signaling pathways. Since diacylglycerol or phosphatidic acid, which are derived from phospholipids, are important second messengers, changes in PCho levels could also influence signaling in apoptotic neutrophils. It was recently shown that phospholipase D (PLD) activity was increased upon neutrophil activation and that inhibition of PLD also reduced the neutrophils respiratory burst [45].

## CONCLUDING REMARKS

Neutrophils show upon activation or during apoptosis changes in their metabolic profiles according to NMR spectroscopy. While activation via LPS or TNFα is not distinguishable according to the respective metabolic profiles, aged cells show a clear increase in NAD , decreased ATP + and/or ADP levels and PCho levels. Whereas NAD , ATP, + and ADP are related to energy metabolism, changes of PCho levels can reflect membrane rearrangements or alterations in signaling during apoptosis. Our findings provide insights into neutrophils metabolism that will be important for a comprehensive understanding of neutrophils functions and will be a prerequisite for investigating metabolic changes in neutrophils during physiological antimicrobial functions and during pathological functions as well such as in autoimmune diseases.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The study was supported by the DFG research training groups RTG1727 and iRTG 1911. The authors thank D. Zillikens and A. Recke for helpful discussions. The Phenome Training Center at the Imperial College London is acknowledged for kindly providing the matlab functions.

Author Contributions BCR and NS conducted experiments, and TL and KS designed the study.

## COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS

Conflicts of Interest. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## REFERENCES

- 1. Shen, Xiao-Fei, Cao Ke, Jin-peng Jiang, Wen-Xian Guan, and Du Jun-Feng. 2017. Neutrophil dysregulation during sepsis: an overview and update. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine 21 (9): 1687 -1697. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.13112.
- 2. Jorch, Selina K., and Paul Kubes. 2017. An emerging role for neutrophil extracellular traps in noninfectious disease. Nature Medicine 23 (3): 279 -287. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4294.
- 3. Mayadas, Tanya N., Xavier Cullere, and Clifford A. Lowell. 2014. The multifaceted functions of neutrophils. Annual Review of Pathology 9: 181 218. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pathol-020712--164023.
- 4. Delgado-Rizo, Vidal, Marco A. Martínez-Guzmán, Liliana IñiguezGutierrez, Alejandra García-Orozco, Anabell Alvarado-Navarro, and Mary Fafutis-Morris. 2017. Neutrophil extracellular traps and its implications in inflammation: an overview. Frontiers in Immunology 8: 81. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2017.00081.
- 5. Teng, Tie-Shan, Ai-ling Ji, Xin-Ying Ji, and Yan-Zhang Li. 2017. Neutrophils and immunity: from bactericidal action to being conquered. Journal of Immunology Research 2017: 9671604. https:// doi.org/10.1155/2017/9671604.
- 6. Aga, Eresso, Dörthe M. Katschinski, Ger van Zandbergen, Helmut Laufs, Birgit Hansen, Kerstin Müller, Werner Solbach, and Tamás Laskay. 2002. Inhibition of the spontaneous apoptosis of neutrophil granulocytes by the intracellular parasite Leishmania major . The Journal of Immunology 169 (2): 898.
- 7. Tak, Tamar, Kiki Tesselaar, Janesh Pillay, José A.M. Borghans, and Leo Koenderman. 2013. What's your age again? Determination of human neutrophil half-lives revisited. Journal of Leukocyte Biology 94 (4): 595 -601. https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.1112571.
- 8. Payne, Claire M., Lewis Glasser, Marc E. Tischler, Deborah Wyckoff, Douglas Cromey, Roger Fiederlein, and Oliver Bohnert. 1994. Programmed cell death of the normal human neutrophil: an in vitro model of senescence. Microscopy Research and Technique 28 (4): 327 -344. https://doi.org/10.1002/ jemt.1070280408.
- 9. El Kebir, Driss, and János G. Filep. 2010. Role of neutrophil a p o p t o s i s i n t h e r e s o l u t i o n o f i n f l a m m a t i o n . TheScientificWorldJOURNAL 10 . doi:https://doi.org/10.1100/ tsw.2010.169.
- 10. Ortega-Gómez, Almudena, Mauro Perretti, and Oliver Soehnlein. 2013. Resolution of inflammation: an integrated view. EMBO Molecular Medicine 5 (5): 661.
- 11. Maianski, N.A., J. Geissler, S.M. Srinivasula, E.S. Alnemri, D. Roos, and T.W. Kuijpers. 2004. Functional characterization of mitochondria in neutrophils: a role restricted to apoptosis. Cell Death and Differentiation 11 (2): 143 -153.
- 12. Fossati, Gianluca, Dale A. Moulding, David G. Spiller, Robert J. Moots, Michael R.H. White, and Steven W. Edwards. 2003. The mitochondrial network of human neutrophils: role in chemotaxis, phagocytosis, respiratory burst activation, and commitment to apoptosis. The Journal of Immunology 170 (4): 1964.
- 13. Borregaard, Niels, and Troels Herlin. 1982. Energy metabolism of human neutrophils during phagocytosis. Journal of Clinical Investigation 70 (3): 550 -557.
- 14. Stjernholm, Rune L. 1967. Carbohydrate metabolism in leukocytes VII. Metabolism of glucose, acetate, and propionate by human plasma cells. Journal of Bacteriology 93 (5): 1657 -1661.
- 15. Eltzschig, Holger K., Christopher F. MacManus, and Sean P. Colgan. 2008. Neutrophils as sources of extracellular nucleotides:
- functional consequences at the vascular interface. Trends in Cardiovascular Medicine 18 (3): 103 -107. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.tcm.2008.01.006.
- 16. Nunn, Alistair V.W., Maria L. Barnard, Kishore Bhakoo, Joanna Murray, Edwin J. Chilvers, and Jimmy D. Bell. 1996. Characterisation of secondary metabolites associated with neutrophil apoptosis. FEBS Letters 392 (3): 295 -298. https://doi.org/10.1016/00145793(96)00839-3.
- 17. Green, Terrence R., Jack H. Fellman, Alisa L. Eicher, and Katherine L. Pratt. 1991. Antioxidant role and subcellular location of hypotaurine and taurine in human neutrophils. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General Subjects 1073 (1): 91 -97. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4165(91)90187-L.
- 18. Markley, John L., Rafael Brüschweiler, Arthur S. Edison, Hamid R. Eghbalnia, Robert Powers, Daniel Raftery, and David S. Wishart. 2017. The future of NMR-based metabolomics. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 43 (Supplement C): 34 -40. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.copbio.2016.08.001.
- 19. Salei, Natallia, Lars Hellberg, Jörg Köhl, and Tamás Laskay. 2017. Enhanced survival of Leishmania major in neutrophil granulocytes in the presence of apoptotic cells. PLoS One 12 (2): e0171850. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0171850.
- 20. Esmann, Lars, Christian Idel, Arup Sarkar, Lars Hellberg, Martina Behnen, Sonja Möller, Ger van Zandbergen, et al. 2009. Phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by neutrophil granulocytes: diminished proinflammatory neutrophil functions in the presence of apoptotic cells. The Journal of Immunology 184 (1): 391.
- 21. Böhmer, R.H., L.S. Trinkle, and J.L. Staneck. 1992. Dose effects of LPS on neutrophils -in a whole blood flow cytometric assay of phagocytosis and oxidative burst. Cytometry 13 (5): 525 -531. https://doi.org/10.1002/cyto.990130512.
- 22. Soler-Rodriguez, Ana Maria, Hongwei Zhang, Henri S. Lichenstein, Nilofer Qureshi, David W. Niesel, Sheila E. Crowe, Johnny W. Peterson, and Gary R. Klimpel. 2000. Neutrophil activation by bacterial lipoprotein versus lipopolysaccharide: differential requirements for serum and CD14. The Journal of Immunology 164 (5): 2674.
- 23. Lin, ChingYu, Wu Huifeng, RonaldS Tjeerdema, and MarkR Viant. 2007. Evaluation of metabolite extraction strategies from tissue samples using NMR metabolomics. Metabolomics 3 (1): 55 67. -https://doi.org/10.1007/s11306-006-0043-1.
- 24. Lee, Insong James, Kellie Hom, Guoyun Bai, and Michael Shapiro. 2009. NMR metabolomic analysis of Caco-2 cell differentiation. Journal of Proteome Research 8 (8): 4104 4108. https://doi.org/ -10.1021/pr8010759.
- 25. Gey, Claudia, and Karsten Seeger. 2017. Metabolic changes investigated by proton NMR spectroscopy in cells undergoing oncogene-induced senescence. In Oncogene-induced senescence: methods and protocols , ed. Mikhail A. Nikiforov, 155 -163. New York: Springer.
- 26. Dieterle, Frank, Alfred Ross, Götz Schlotterbeck, and Hans Senn. 2006. Probabilistic quotient normalization as robust method to account for dilution of complex biological mixtures. Application in 1 H NMR metabonomics. Analytical Chemistry 78 (13): 4281 4290. -https://doi.org/10.1021/ac051632c.
- 27. Craig, Andrew, Olivier Cloarec, Elaine Holmes, Jeremy K. Nicholson, and John C. Lindon. 2006. Scaling and normalization effects in NMR spectroscopic metabonomic data sets. Analytical Chemistry 78 (7): 2262 -2267. https://doi.org/10.1021/ ac0519312.
- 28. Cloarec, Olivier, Marc E. Dumas, Johan Trygg, Andrew Craig, Richard H. Barton, John C. Lindon, Jeremy K. Nicholson, and Elaine Holmes. 2005. Evaluation of the orthogonal projection on

latent structure model limitations caused by chemical shift variability and improved visualization of biomarker changes in 1 H NMR spectroscopic metabonomic studies. Analytical Chemistry 77 (2): 517 526. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac048803i. -

- 29. Benjamini, Yoav, and Yosef Hochberg. 1995. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Methodological) 57 (1): 289 -300.
- 30. Cloarec, Olivier, Marc-Emmanuel Dumas, Andrew Craig, Richard H. Barton, Johan Trygg, Jane Hudson, Christine Blancher, et al. 2005. Statistical total correlation spectroscopy: an exploratory approach for latent biomarker identification from metabolic 1 H NMR data sets. Analytical Chemistry 77 (5): 1282 -1289. https://doi.org/ 10.1021/ac048630x.
- 31. Veselkov, Kirill A., John C. Lindon, Timothy M.D. Ebbels, Derek Crockford, Vladimir V . V olynkin, Elaine Holmes, David B. Davies, and Jeremy K. Nicholson. 2009. Recursive segment-wise peak alignment of biological 1 H NMR spectra for improved metabolic biomarker recovery. Analytical Chemistry 81 (1): 56 66. https:// -doi.org/10.1021/ac8011544.
- 32. Schönig, Sarah, Andreas Recke, Misa Hirose, Ralf Ludwig, and Karsten Seeger. 2013. Metabolite analysis distinguishes between mice with epidermolysis bullosa acquisita and healthy mice. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 8 (1): 93.
- 33. Gey, Claudia, and Karsten Seeger. 2013. Metabolic changes during cellular senescence investigated by proton NMR-spectroscopy. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 134 (3 -4): 130 -138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mad.2013.02.002.
- 34. Kolaczkowska, Elzbieta, and Paul Kubes. 2013. Neutrophil recruitment and function in health and inflammation. Nature Reviews Immunology 13: 159. https://doi.org/10.1038/nri3399.
- 35. Marcinkiewicz, Janusz, and Ewa Kontny. 2014. Taurine and inflammatory diseases. Amino Acids 46 (1): 7 -20. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00726-012-1361-4.
- 36. Cunningham, C., K.F. Tipton, and H.B. Dixon. 1998. Conversion of taurine into N-chlorotaurine (taurine chloramine) and

- sulphoacetaldehyde in response to oxidative stress. Biochemical Journal 330 (Pt 2): 939 -945.
- 37. Masuda, Midori, Kazuyoshi Horisaka, and Takemi Koeda. 1984. Influences of taurine on functions of rat neutrophils. The Japanese Journal of Pharmacology 34 (1): 116 -118. https://doi.org/10.1254/ jjp.34.116.
- 38. Kobayashi, Yoshiro. 2015. Neutrophil biology: an update. EXCLI Journal 14: 220 -227. https://doi.org/10.17179/excli2015-102.
- 39. Houtkooper, Riekelt H., Eija Pirinen, and Johan Auwerx. 2012. Sirtuins as regulators of metabolism and healthspan. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 13 (4): 225 -238.
- 40. Weiliang, Xia, Wang Zheng, Wang Qing, Han Jin, Zhao Cuiping, Hong Yunyi, Zeng Lili, Tang Le, and Ying Weihai. 2009. Roles of NAD + / NADH and NADP + / NADPH in cell death. Current Pharmaceutical Design 15 (1): 12 -19. https://doi.org/10.2174/ 138161209787185832.
- 41. Pliyev, Boris K., Anna V . Ivanova, and Valery G. Savchenko. 2014. Extracellular NAD+ inhibits human neutrophil apoptosis. Apoptosis 19 (4): 581 -593. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10495-013-0948-x.
- 42. Adriouch, Sahil, Friedrich Haag, Olivier Boyer, Michel Seman, and Friedrich Koch-Nolte. 2012. Extracellular NAD+: a danger signal hindering regulatory T cells. Microbes and Infection 14 (14): 1284 -1292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micinf.2012.05.011.
- 43. Bao, Yi, Carola Ledderose, Thomas Seier, Amelie F. Graf, Bianca Brix, Eritza Chong, and Wolfgang G. Junger. 2014. Mitochondria regulate neutrophil activation by generating ATP for autocrine purinergic signaling. Journal of Biological Chemistry 289 (39): 26794 26803. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.572495. -
- 44. Fadeel, Bengt. 2004. Plasma membrane alterations during apoptosis: role in corpse clearance. Antioxidants &amp; Redox Signaling 6 (2): 269 -275. https://doi.org/10.1089/152308604322899332.
- 45. Hu, Tianhui, Zhaoxia Liu, and Xun Shen. 2011. Roles of phospholipase D in phorbol myristate acetate-stimulated neutrophil respiratory burst. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine 15 (3): 647 -653. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01035.x.