<!-- image -->

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/224808216

## Comparison of the Neutrophil Proteome in Trauma Patients and Normal Controls

Article in Protein and Peptide Letters · April 2012

<!-- image -->

## Comparison of the Neutrophil Proteome in Trauma Patients and Normal Controls

Liz M.B. Teles , Elaine N. Aquino , Anne C.D. Neves , Carlos H.S. Garcia a a a a,b , Peter Roepstorff , b Belchor Fontes , Mariana S. Castro c a,d and Wagner Fontes* ,a,#

a Laboratory of Biochemistry and Protein Chemistry, Cell Biology Department, University of Brasília, Brazil;   Departb ment  of  Biochemistry  and  Molecular  Biology,  University  of  Southern  Denmark,  Odense,  Denmark; c Laboratory  of Medical Investigation (LIM-62), 3 rd Division of Clinical Surgery, Hospital das Clínicas, University of São Paulo School of Medicine, Brazil;  Laboratory of Toxinology, Physiological Sciences Department, University of Brasília, Brazil d

Abstract: Background: Neutrophils have an impressive array of microbicidal weapons, and in the presence of a pathogen, progress from a quiescent state in the bloodstream to a completely activated state. Failure to regulate this activation, for example, when the blood is flooded with cytokines after severe trauma, causes inappropriate neutrophil activation that paradoxically, is associated with tissue and organ damage. Acidic proteomic maps of quiescent human neutrophils were analyzed and compared to those of activated neutrophils from severe trauma patients. The analysis revealed 114 spots whose measured volumes differed between activated and quiescent neutrophils, with 27 upregulated and 87 downregulated in trauma conditions. Among the identified proteins, grancalcin, S100-A9 and CACNB2 reinforce observed correlations between

<!-- image -->

motility and ion flux, ANXA3, SNAP, FGD1 and Zfyve19 are involved in vesicular transport and exocytosis, and GSTP1, HSPA1 HSPA1L, MAOB, UCH-L5, and PPA1 presented evidence that activated neutrophils may have diminished protection  against  oxidative  damage  and  are  prone  to  apoptosis.  These  are  discussed,  along  with  proteins  involved  in  cytoskeleton reorganization, reactive oxygen species production, and ion flux. Proteins such as Zfyve19, MAOB and albumin-like protein were described for the first time in the neutrophil. In this work we achieved the identification of several proteins potentially involved in inflammatory signaling after trauma, as well as proteins described for the first time in neutrophils.

Keywords: Neutrophils, trauma, proteome, systemic inflammatory response syndrome, inflammation.

# Author profile: Wagner Fontes is a professor of Biochemistry at the University of Brasilia, Brazil since 1997 and member of the Brazilian Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. He graduated in Medicine and has a PhD in Molecular Biology: Protein Chemistry. His research interests include proteomics of the inflammatory response, toxinology and bioinformatics.

## INTRODUCTION

Trauma is major cause of mortality in the Western world, for people under the age of 45 [1-2]. The mechanical energy of severe trauma may injure tissues and organs, and usually results in intense bleeding and hemorrhagic shock, leading to tissue ischemia. Other insults, such as surgical interventions or  infections,  may  aggravate  the  patient's  condition  [3-4]. Fluid  resuscitation  after  prolonged  shock  involves  reperfusion that carries  inflammatory  mediators from  ischemic tissue  to  multiple  organs,  in  which  may  lead  to  the  development of the complex phenomenon of systemic inflammatory response  syndrome  (SIRS)  and  acute  respiratory  distress syndrome  (ARDS).  This  trauma-induced  immune  response involves  the  activation  of  diverse  cell  types,  mainly  polymorphonuclear neutrophils which, besides controlling infection by phagocytosing bacteria, are well known for their ap

glyph&lt;c=20,font=/TimesNewRoman,Bold&gt; glyph&lt;c=27,font=/TimesNewRoman,Bold&gt; glyph&lt;c=26,font=/TimesNewRoman,Bold&gt; glyph&lt;c=24,font=/TimesNewRoman,Bold&gt; -glyph&lt;c=24,font=/TimesNewRoman,Bold&gt; glyph&lt;c=22,font=/TimesNewRoman,Bold&gt; glyph&lt;c=19,font=/TimesNewRoman,Bold&gt; glyph&lt;c=24,font=/TimesNewRoman,Bold&gt; /12 $58.00+.00

parently paradoxical role as an important cell mediator in the SIRS mechanism.

Compensatory anti-inflammatory response syndrome (CARS) is another response to trauma whose mechanism is not yet completely  established. CARS  results  from  the counter-regulating  suppression  of  various  cellular  and  humoral  immune functions,  and  is  characterized  by  an  excessive production of anti-inflammatory mediators, such as interleukin-10 (IL-10) [5], and is associated with the onset of sepsis.

Neutrophils are the most extensively studied cells of the inflammatory response and are implicated in the pathogenesis of tissue injury after trauma. The function of neutrophils in  host  defense and  injury has been the topic of  intense investigation [6]. However, in spite of substantial advances in our  understanding  of  the  biochemistry  of  innate  immune response  cells  such  as  neutrophils,  few  innovations  have targeted  the  diagnostic  indicators  of  the  systemic  acute  inflammatory response to trauma or sepsis [7].

Neutrophils are activated by a variety of receptormediated agonists, and undergo rapid changes in phenotype

and  function,  including  adhesion,  migration,  phagocytosis, generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and degranulation  of  stored  inflammatory  proteins.  These  processes  are performed and regulated by proteins in a complex interactive network.  Activation  mechanisms  identified  to  date  largely involve  post-transcriptional  checkpoints  [8].  In  addition  to post-translational modifications, splicing and allelic variation can contribute to the tight control of the synthesis of cytokines, ion channels and metabolism-related proteins.

Currently,  laboratory  evaluation  of  patients  with  suspected  sepsis  or  inflammatory  disorders  such  as  SIRS  and ARDS uses  tests  with  poor  sensitivity  and  specificity.  The complexity of the  clinical presentation of SIRS, ARDS and sepsis  requires  new  assays  with  early  diagnostic  and  prognostic  value.  Possible  candidates  for  these  assays  maybe found in  neutrophil  proteins,  which  are  investigated  in  this work by comparative analysis of the proteomes of quiescent and trauma-activated cells.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Sample Preparation

Neutrophils  for  the  control  group  were  obtained  from volunteer donors with no history of chronic diseases, no recent  inflammatory  diseases,  and  no  medication  use  within the  last  60  days.  Polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  were  obtained from major torso trauma patients at the HC-FMUSP, 24-48  h  after  the  traumatic  event.  Trauma  patients  had  an anatomical  injury  severity  score  (ISS)  of  29,  received  no more  than  4  units  of  blood  products  transfusion  up  to  the moment of  sample  collection  [9],  and  presented  no  hollow viscera injury and no signs of infection. Donors and patients were 25-45 years old. The project was approved by the ethical  committee  of  HC-FMUSP  (process  #  2001045)  before donors and patients were contacted.

Neutrophils  were  isolated  as  described  previously  [10] with  minor  modifications.  Briefly,  blood  was  collected  in heparinized solution and centrifuged through 60% and 70% density  layers  of  Percoll  (Amersham  Biosciences,  Uppsala, Sweden).  Residual  erythrocytes  were  removed  by  osmotic lysis.  An  aliquot  was  taken  for  cell  counting  in  Neubauer chamber and viability analysis by nigrosine test. Purification was at room temperature to avoid activation, except for the density gradient step.

Samples  yielding  2  x  10   cells/mL  (98%  neutrophils, 7 99% viable) were immediately subjected to cell lysis in protein  solubilization  buffer  (7  M  urea,  2  M  thiourea,  1%  v/v Triton X-100, 0.5% v/v Pharmalyte 4-7, 65 mmol/L dithiotreitol - DTT) containing protease inhibitors. Cell lysis was in a  shaker  for  2  h  at  25 ° C.  After  protein  solubilization,  the supernatant  following  centrifugation  of  the  cell  lysate  was frozen at -80 ° C until electrophoretic separation.

## Two-Dimensional  (2D)  Polyacrylamide  Gel  Electrophoresis

Neutrophil  protein  extracts  were  submitted  to  protein quantification [11] and diluted in protein solubilization buffer,  pH  4-7,  to  a  final  protein  concentration  of  0.14 μ g/ μ L. A sample of 350 glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEOPDO+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; L in lysis buffer was applied to 18cm  immobilized  pH  gradient  (IPG)  gel  strips  with  a  linear

pH range of 4 to 7 (Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden) and submitted to isoelectric focusing using an IPGphor (Amersham  Biosciences,  Uppsala,  Sweden)  [12].  After  focusing, IPG gel strips were submitted to protein reduction in 125  mM  DTT  and  alkylation  in  135  mM  iodoacetamide. Sodium  dodecyl  sulfate  polyacrylamide  gel  electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed on 12% T gels run on a Protean II  system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) at 25 mA per gel until the dye front reached the end. Proteins were visualized by ammoniacal silver staining, chosen for the improved sensitivity and compatibility to mass spectrometry [6, 13].

## Images and Statistical Analysis

Images from the total of 18 gels (nine gels of each group, comprising  biological  and  technical  replicates)  were  analyzed with ImageMaster Platinum software (Amersham Biosciences,  Uppsala,  Sweden).  The  experimental  design  was validated  according  to  Chich et  al .  [14]  Volumes  for  each spot were normalized against the total volume of the detected spots. For both the normal donors and the severe trauma patients, one gel was assigned as a standard for the remaining eight  gels.  After  pairing  within  each  group,  the  two  master gels were matched. Paired spots were tested for normality of volumes  using  the  Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test.  Significance of differences  in spot volumes was  assessed using an Independent-Samples  T-test  (for  parametric  samples)  or  MannWhitney test (for non-parametric samples). As noted by Biron and Magalhães et  al. [15-16], two additional stringency criteria were applied. To avoid false positive results in statistical parameters, the difference in spot volume ratio was required  to  be  at  least  twice  between  the  groups  of  gels,  and the  spot  was  required  to  be  present  in  at  least  five  gels  in each  group.  Spots  were  considered  specifically  present  if they appeared in  at  least five gels in  a group, and were not detected in any gels of the other group.

## Peptide  Mass  Fingerprinting  (PMF)  and  Tandem  Mass Spectrometry Fragmentation (MS/MS)

Silver-stained  spots  were  excised,  destained,  in-gel  digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA), and extracted as  previously  described  [17].  Before  application  on  matrixassisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) targets, digests were desalted  using  reversed-phase  chromatography  microcolumns and  eluted  on  the  surface  of  AnchorChip  384/600 targets (Bruker Daltonics, Leipzig, Germany) with a matrix mix of glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEOPEC+Symbol&gt; -cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid and 2,5 dihydroxybenzoic acid, 1:1 (v/v), 5 glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEOPDO+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; g/ glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEOPDO+TimesNewRomanPSMT&gt; L final concentration [18].

PMF used a MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Autoflex II;  Bruker Daltonics, Leipzig, Germany), in positive  and  reflector  mode,  after  external  calibration  using  a standard  peptide  mixture  ranging  from  757  to  2465  mass units.  Spectra  were  internally  calibrated  with  peaks  from keratin contaminant digestion and trypsin autolysis. Selected peaks were used in PMF searches for protein identification, and those that did not fulfill the validation criteria described below  were  subjected  to  MS/MS  fragmentation.  MS/MS fragmentation  was  carried  out  using  the  LIFT  technique, which, combined with peptide mass fingerprinting, increased the identification rate [19]. Mass spectra were analyzed using FlexAnalysis and Biotools software (Bruker Daltonics). Pro-

tein identification used Mascot software. Searches were performed against the NCBInr database [20] with 50-100 ppm mass  tolerance  and  a  fragmentation  mass  tolerance  of  90 mmu.  Search  parameters  were  restricted  to Homo  sapiens and  one  missed  cleavage  was  allowed.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation  of  methionine  and  N-terminal  acetylation  as  variable modifications.

To further validate Mascot results, we applied stringency criteria  that  the  peptide  mass  error  distribution  should  fit  a distribution  curve,  and  coherence  between  theoretical  and experimental mass and pI values should be within 15%. Peptides containing missed cleavages and methionine oxidation were manually verified. To reduce redundancy and validate the  sequence  data,  significant  results  (p  &lt;0.05)  were  analyzed in GPMAW software (Lighthouse data, Odense, Denmark) for multiple peptide location.

## RESULTS

An average of 850 spots were detected on each gel. After comparison and statistical analysis using the stringency criteria described above, 114 spots showed differential volumes, with 357 spots undetectable in activated neutrophils, and 244 spots exclusively found in activated neutrophils from severe trauma patients. Fig. ( 1 ) shows the 2D map for the quiescent neutrophil  state highlighting the  identified  and the differentially  expressed  proteins.  Table 1 summarizes  information about each identified protein. In the section below, after each protein,  the  number  in  parenthesis  indicates  where  the  protein can be found in Table 1 and on Fig. ( 1 ).

Image of a 2D gel obtained from quiescent neutrophils. Spots whose measured volumes differed between the control and trauma conditions are in white. Boxes show examples of spot volume comparisons between the conditions. In the 3D view of the spot, the peak height represents staining intensity and the corresponding gel image is below. Numeric identification corresponds to the proteins in Table 1 .

The  unique  identified  protein  upregulated  in  activated neutrophils  was  PPA1  (1398)  or  pyrophosphatase  enzyme. Proteins  downregulated  in  trauma  included  ubiquitin  carboxyl-terminal  hydrolase  L5  (UCH-L5)  (1179),  L-plastin (354), vimentin  (521), glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPAMA+Symbol&gt; -actin (729), grancalcin (1282), S100-A9 (1543), glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEPAMA+Symbol&gt; -soluble  N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive  factor  (NSF)-attachment protein (SNAP) (1024) , annexin A3 (ANXA3) (1052), heat shock 70 kDa protein 1 (HSPA1A) (358),  glutathione  S-transferase  P  (GSTP1)  (1336),  laminin receptor 1 (RSSA) (811), and Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor (RhoGDI) (1262) complex.

In the set of proteins detected only in quiescent cells, we identified KIAA0564 (71), histidyl-tRNA synthetase (HisRS) (526), interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide  repeats  2  (IFIT2)  (595),  modulator  of  retrovirus  infection (MRI) (1501), postmeiotic segregation increased 2-like 3  (PMS2L3)  (1360),  pseudouridylate  synthase  7  homolog ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae )-like (PUS7L)  (1479), NCKassociated  protein  1-like  (NCKAP1L)  (102),  heat  shock  70 kDa protein 1-like (HSPA1L) (508), desmin (603), albuminlike  (679),  zinc  finger  FYVE  domain  19  (Zfyve19)  (680), faciogenital dysplasia 1 protein (FGD1) - a protein reported

as  containing  the  domains  FYVE,  RhoGEF  and  PH  (546), antibody-dependent  cellular  cytotoxicity  (ADCC)-enhanced Fc   fragment  (629),  monoamine  oxidase  type  B  (MAOB) glyph&lt;c=3,font=/CEPAMA+Symbol&gt; (695),  calcium  channel  voltage-dependent  beta-2  subunit (CACNB2) (904) and chloride intracellular channel (CLIC4) (982).

## DISCUSSION

Adams and Botha et al. demonstrated that trauma modulates neutrophil function [21-22]. Our results showing differences  in  proteins  in  neutrophils  from  trauma  patients  and normal controls corroborate these findings. Of the 114 spots showing different volumes, 27 were upregulated and 87 were downregulated  after  activation  by  systemic  inflammation caused by trauma. Previously, we identified 22 proteins [6] by  2D-acidic  mapping  of  the  quiescent  neutrophil.  In  this article, 29 additional proteins were identified, enhancing the identification sensitivity of our previous study.  The number of successful identifications was rather low because of contamination  with  keratin  and  low  abundance  in  the  gels. Among proteins  differentially  expressed  between  quiescent and activated neutrophils, we identified 1 upregulated and 12 downregulated  proteins,  and  16  that  were  below  the  detection  level  in  polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  from  trauma patients.

The identification of pyrophosphatase (PPA1) (1398) as upregulated in  trauma is in  accordance with the findings of Borregaard  and  Herlin,  that  activated  neutrophils  enhance the glucose consumption and consequently the production of ATP  and  NADPH  which  will  be  used  in  ROS  production [23].  After  trauma,  the  augmented  level  of  glucagon  hormone maintains blood glucose levels until depauperation. To generate energy the cells potentiate some biochemical processes  as  oxidation  of  fatty  acids,  which  requires  the  pyrophosphatase enzyme (PPA1). Also, PPA1 is associated with apoptosis  induction  [24],  consistent  with  the  functions  of other proteins described below.

Composing  the  trauma  downregulated  proteins  class, ubiquitin  carboxyl-terminal  hydrolase  L5  (UCH-L5)  (1179) is a deubiquitinating enzyme and degradation of proteins by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is critical in regulating the levels of most cellular proteins  and in the rapid elimination of  misfolded  proteins  [25].  UCH-L5  was  also  described  as associated  with  a  chromatin-remodeling  complex  and  can participate  in  the  regulation  of  transcription  or  DNA  repair [26]. The finding of this protein as downregulated after activation  suggests  a  decrease  in  repair  mechanisms,  protein processing, ubiquitin turnover and in the regulation of transcription, as proposed by Hossain et al. [27].

L-plastin  (354)  is  an  actin-bundling  protein  which  collaborates  to  the  modifications  on  leukocyte  cytoskeleton  at membrane ruffles during activation [28].  Vimentin  (521)  is an  intermediate  filament  cytoskeletal  protein  which  participates in neutrophil adhesion and transmigration, and can be secreted to the extracellular space collaborating in cytotoxic processes,  such  as  bacteria  killing  and  oxidative  metabolite production [29].  Beta-actin (729) is  the major protein  component of the cytoskeleton, can assemble into filaments and generate  a  motile  machine  capable  of  efficient  and  rapid

Figure 1. Proteomic map of neutrophils.

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Neutrophil proteins identified by MALDI-TOF PMF and MS/MS fragmentation. Spot numbers coincide with Fig. (1)

|   Spot | Expression  Parameter a                 | p-value   | Accession  Number   | Name      | Activity                                   | pI  (theor/exp)   | Mr  (theor/exp)  (kDa)   |   PMF  Score   b |   PMF  C(%) c | MS/MS  Score   d   | MS/MS peptides                                                                   |
|--------|-----------------------------------------|-----------|---------------------|-----------|--------------------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|------------------|---------------|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|     71 | Q                                       |           | gi|3043652          | KIAA0564  | Translation                                | 6.37 / 6.56       | 163 / 176                |              354 |            39 | -                  |                                                                                  |
|    102 | Q                                       |           | gi|34485727         | NCKAP1L   | Structural / Motility                      | 6.39 / 5.53       | 130 / 120                |               97 |            19 | -                  |                                                                                  |
|    354 | glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEPBLI+Symbol&gt; T (4.59) | 0.003     | gi 1346733  |       | L-plastin | Structural /  Cytoskeleton  remodelling    | 5.20 / 5.20       | 71 / 70                  |              259 |            64 | 138                | R.NWMNSLGVNPR.V  K.MINLSVPDTIDER.T  K.FSLVGIGGQDLNEGNR.T                         |
|    358 | glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEPBLI+Symbol&gt; T (3.92) | 0.024     | gi|194248072        | HSPA1A    | Protein metabolism /  Oxidative protection | 5.48 / 5.56       | 70 / 75                  |              361 |            60 | 67                 | R.TTPSYVAFTDTER.L  R.ARFEELCSDLFR.S  K.NQVALNPQNTVFDAKR.L                        |
|    508 | Q                                       |           | gi|124256496        | HSPA1L    | Protein metabolism /  Oxidative protection | 5.76 / 5.21       | 71 / 66                  |               88 |            20 | -                  |                                                                                  |
|    521 | glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEPBLI+Symbol&gt; T (5.28) | 0.003     | gi|62414289         | vimentin  | Structural / Motility                      | 5.06 / 5.03       | 54 / 62                  |              201 |            49 | 71                 | R.SLYASSPGGVYATR.S  R.TYSLGSALRPSTSR.S  R.ISLPLPNFSSLNLR.E  K.FADLSEAANRNNDALR.Q |

## (Table 1) Contd….

| Spot   | Expression  Parameter a                  | p-value   | Accession  Number   | Name                                  | Activity                                  | pI  (theor/exp)   | Mr  (theor/exp)  (kDa)   | PMF  Score   b   | PMF  C(%) c   | MS/MS  Score   d   | MS/MS peptides                                                                                                                      |
|--------|------------------------------------------|-----------|---------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|------------------|---------------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 526    | Q                                        |           | gi|62766469         | HisRS                                 | Translation                               | 5.72 / 5.51       | 58 / 62                  | 181              | 46            | -                  |                                                                                                                                     |
| 546    | Q                                        |           | gi|194389088        | FGD1                                  | Granule transport                         | 5.57 / 5.32       | 60 / 58                  | 91               | 22            | -                  |                                                                                                                                     |
| 595    | Q                                        |           | gi|153082755        | IFIT2                                 | Translation/apoptosis                     | 6.32 / 6.59       | 55 / 59                  | 82               | 23            | -                  |                                                                                                                                     |
| 603    | Q                                        |           | gi|1408188          | desmin                                | Structural/motility                       | 5.21 / 5.70       | 53 / 60                  | 238              | 60            | -                  |                                                                                                                                     |
| 629    | Q                                        |           | gi|171848866        | ADCC-Enh.  Fc Fragment                | Cell stimulation                          | 6.37 / 5.35       | 26 / 54                  | 78               | 60            | 39                 | R.VVSVLTVLHQDWLNGK.E                                                                                                                |
| 679    | Q                                        |           | gi|763431           | albumin-like                          | Structural                                | 5.69 / 5.66       | 53 / 56                  | 162              | 46            | 96                 | K.KVPQVSTPTLVEVSR.N  R.RHPDYSVVLLLR.L  K.DVFLGMFLYEYAR.R                                                                            |
| 680    | Q                                        |           | gi|119612854        | Zfyve19                               | Granule transport                         | 5.21 / 6.13       | 48 / 53                  | 109              | 27            | -                  |                                                                                                                                     |
| 695    | Q                                        |           | gi|38202207         | MAOB                                  | Amine metabo- lism/oxidative protec- tion | 7.20 / 6.79       | 59 / 52                  | 103              | 34            | -                  |                                                                                                                                     |
| 729    | glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPCKE+Symbol&gt; T (2.74)  | 0.027     | gi|14250401         | glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEPCKE+Symbol&gt; -actin | Structural/motility                       | 5.56 / 5.27       | 41 / 49                  | 80               | 31            | 63                 | R.AVFPSIVGRPR.H K.SYELPDGQVITIGNER.F                                                                                                |
| 811    | glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPCKE+Symbol&gt; T (2.67)  | 0.040     | gi|125969           | RSSA                                  | Adhesion receptor                         | 4.79 / 4.69       | 33 / 46                  | 192              | 53            | 212                | K.FAAATGATPIAGR.F  R.AIVAIENPADVSVISSR.N  R.FTPGTFTNQIQAAFREPR.L                                                                    |
| 904    | Q                                        |           | gi|150039531        | CACNB2                                | Voltage-gated calcium  channel            | 6.41 / 6.16       | 46 / 43                  | 84               | 31            | -                  |                                                                                                                                     |
| 982    | Q                                        |           | gi|7330335          | CLIC4                                 | Voltage-gated chloride  channel           | 5.45 / 5.60       | 29 / 38                  | 76               | 41            | -                  |                                                                                                                                     |
| 1024   | glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPCKE+Symbol&gt; T (5.76)  | 0.003     | gi 116242794  |     | SNAP                                  | Granule transport                         | 5.23 / 5.23       | 34 / 33                  | 197              | 75            | -                  |                                                                                                                                     |
| 1052   | glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPCKE+Symbol&gt; T (6.34)  | 0.001     | gi 4826643  |       | ANXA3                                 | Structural/Granule  transport             | 5.63 / 5.63       | 37 / 36                  | 268              | 62            |                    | K.LTFDEYR.N  M.ASIWVGHR.G + Acetyl  (Protein N-term)  R.NTPAFLAER.L  K.GIGTDEFTLNR.I  K.GAGTNEDALIEILTTR.T  K.GELSGHFEDLLLAIVNCVR.N |
| 1179   | glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPCKE+Symbol&gt; T (2.47)  | 0.006     | gi|55859537         | UCH-L5                                | Protein metabo- lism/DNA repair           | 4.95 / 4.88       | 29 / 32                  | 78               | 52            | 499  -             |                                                                                                                                     |
|        | glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPCKE+Symbol&gt; T (10.66) |           | gi|56676393         | Rho GDI                               | Motility/NADPH oxi- dase assembly         |                   | 23/ 29                   | 167              | 81            |                    | K.YVQHTYR.T                                                                                                                         |
| 1262   |                                          | 0.011     |                     |                                       |                                           | 5.10 / 5.12       |                          |                  |               | 38                 |                                                                                                                                     |
| 1282   | glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPCKE+Symbol&gt; T (8.29)  | 0.001     | gi|17943195         | Grancalcin                            | Structural/Motility                       | 5.77 / 4.87       | 19 / 28                  | 69               | 28            | 33                 | R.ALTDFFR.K  R.CLTQSGINGTYSPFSLETCR.I                                                                                               |

Table 1) Contd….

|   Spot | Expression  Parameter a                 | p-value   | Accession  Number   | Name    | Activity                        | pI  (theor/exp)   | Mr  (theor/exp)  (kDa)   |   PMF  Score   b |   PMF  C(%) c | MS/MS  Score   d   | MS/MS peptides       |
|--------|-----------------------------------------|-----------|---------------------|---------|---------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|------------------|---------------|--------------------|----------------------|
|   1336 | glyph&lt;c=3,font=/CEPDNP+Symbol&gt; T (2.53) | 0.003     | gi|119578233        | GSTP1   | Oxidative protection            | 5.43 / 5.67       | 23 / 28                  |              143 |            52 | 247                | K.FQDGDLTLYQSNTILR.H |
|   1360 | Q                                       |           | gi|119592171        | PMS2L3  | Translation/DNA repair          | 4.52 / 5.13       | 19 / 27                  |               67 |            25 | -                  |                      |
|   1398 | glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPDNP+Symbol&gt; T (0.38) | 0.050     | gi|119626587        | PPA1    | Energy metabolism               | 6.82 / 6.03       | 16 / 25                  |               70 |            50 | -                  |                      |
|   1479 | Q                                       |           | gi|119603770        | PUS7L   | Translation                     | 4.57 / 4.49       | 28 / 22                  |               70 |            26 | -                  |                      |
|   1501 | Q                                       |           | gi|208022703        | MRI     | Post-translational proc- essing | 5.16 / 6.50       | 17 / 20                  |               90 |            49 | -                  |                      |
|   1543 | glyph&lt;c=3,font=/CEPDNP+Symbol&gt; T (4.97) | 0.008     | gi 115444  |        | S100-A9 | Motility                        | 5.71 / 5.71       | 13 / 13                  |               83 |            52 | -                  |                      |

a expression parameter: comparison between quiescent and trauma activated cells

- Q : Detected only in quiescent neutrophils
- glyph&lt;c=3,font=/CEPDNP+Symbol&gt; T: Downregulated in trauma conditions
- glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPDNP+Symbol&gt; T: Upregulated in trauma conditions
- The number in parenthesis indicates the ratio for the non-exclusive spots
- b PMF Score: search score form PMF analysis using Mascot software and the NCBI non-redundant database.
- c PMF C (%): percentage of sequence coverage by matched peptides used in PMF searches.

d MS/MS score: search score from peptide fragmentation spectra analysis using Mascot software and the NCBI non-redundant database.

chemotaxis in polymorphonuclear leukocytes [30]. The downregulation of these three cytoskeleton related proteins is probably related to their post-translational processing, either by secretion, proteolysis or by uptake in  complexes, during the remodeling process, instead of a decreased gene expression. This confirms  the findings of Suchard and Boxer [31] and  Mambole et  al. [32]  who  mention  the  cleavage  of  cytoskeletal proteins upon activation. The findings of Fessler et al . [8, 33], showing a low correlation between the transcriptome and the proteome of neutrophils are also supportive for this downregulation.

Laminin receptor 1 or RSSA (811) can function as a leukocyte  surface  receptor  for  laminin  -  a  glycoprotein  of  the endothelium [34]. After exposure to cytokines in inflammatory events, the expression of laminin in endothelial cells is upregulated [35]. A study using rabbit circulating polymorphonuclear leukocytes shows laminin on their surfaces and it is presumably bound to the receptor [36], suggesting a strong binding. Our finding of fewer amounts of laminin receptor 1 after  cell activation can represent an increased link between the receptor and neutrophil laminin, before the development of chemotaxis, adhesion and transmigration.

Grancalcin  (1282)  is  a  cytosolic  Ca 2+ -binding  protein expressed at high levels in neutrophils which translocates to the primary and secondary granules membranes upon leukocyte  activation  [37].  In  activated  neutrophils,  grancalcin  is related with  L-plastin through Ca 2+ dependence in adhesion and spreading processes [38] and the downregulation of both indicates  a  cell  that  is  more  likely  to  adhere  and  migrate, since the molecules are probably  complexed (by interaction with  L-plastin)  in  the  activated  state  [39].  Also,  S100-A9 (1543)  is  one  of  the  major  calcium-binding  molecules  expressed in neutrophils [40]. It  is targeted to  the cell surface upon calcium influx and is released from the leukocyte dur-

ing  the  activation  processes  [41]  inducing  chemotaxis  to other neutrophils and degranulation [42], and this is reasonable with our finding of S100-A9 downregulation. Annexin A3 (ANXA3) (1052) is  a  calcium-dependent phospholipidbinding protein which participates in intracellular membrane fusion  and  granule  aggregation  in  neutrophils,  as  observed when these cells engulfed yeast particles and ANXA3 accumulated  at  periphagosomal  area  [43].  The glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEPDNP+Symbol&gt; -soluble  NSF attachment  protein  (SNAP)  (1024)  has  a  widespread  involvement in vesicular transport pathways leading to membrane fusion among endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus and  secretory  vesicles,  conducting  to  exocytosis  [44].  Our findings  of  SNAP  and  ANXA3  downregulation,  associated to the fact that this class of proteins is secreted from diverse cell  types  in  exosomes [45], suggest that  the  activated neutrophils of those trauma patients have released these proteins.

Heat shock 70 kDa protein 1 or HSPA1A (358) can stabilize  existing proteins against aggregation, protecting against oxidative  damage  and  preventing  apoptosis  [46].  This  protein is also considered an autoantigen chemotactic for leukocytes,  released  by  exocytosis  during  leukocyte  activation [47]. Such facts are coherent with the fewer amounts of this protein.  Glutathione  S-transferase  P  or  GSTP1  (1336)  is  a cytoplasmic enzyme that plays an important role in detoxification  of  ROS.  Reports  of  Yin et  al. showed  that  GSTP1 protects cells against apoptosis promoted by H2O2 exposure [48].

Rho and Rac are GTP-binding proteins of the Rho family,  that  participates  in  the  activity  of  NADPH oxidase, and regulates  motile  responses  [49].  Rho  GDP  dissociation  inhibitor  (RhoGDI)  (1262)  maintains  Rho  protein  in  soluble (cytosolic)  form  [50].  Upon  polymorphonuclear  leukocyte activation, RhoGDI becomes  a  component  of  neutrophil phagosomes, suggesting  a localized  delivery  and  release  of

the GTPases required for Fc glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPFFB+Symbol&gt; receptor-mediated phagocytosis [51]. These processes are consistent with the diminished quantities of RhoGDI found in activated neutrophils.

In the set of proteins detected only in quiescent cells, we identified  a subset  that participates in translation processes: KIAA0564  (71),  HisRS  (526),  IFIT2  (595),  MRI  (1501), PMS2L3  (1360)  and  PUS7L  (1479).  The  activity  of  such proteins involve nucleotide binding, gene expression modulation synthesis and processing of tRNA, DNA repair, regulation of proteasomal processing, of alternative splicing and of  apoptosis.  The  unique  presence  of  these  six  proteins  in quiescent leukocytes  added  to the downregulation of UCHL5 described above might be  alluded to  the  fact  that  many neutrophil activation responses use constitutive biochemical pathways and enzymes performing post-translational modifications in a higher rate than new protein synthesis [52] and reinforces the hypothesis of suppressed reparative pathways in  a  cell  inclined  to  programmed death. In addition, Fessler et  al. described  poor  concordances  between  mRNA  transcriptions and  protein  quantitation  in  polymorphonuclear leukocytes [8, 33].

NCK-associated  protein  1-like  (NCKAP1L)  (102)  collaborates in Rac activation, actin polymerization and myosin regulation in neutrophil  chemotaxis [53]. Soon after receiving the activating stimulus, neutrophils initiate the process of shape  change  and  movement,  when  complex  interactions among cytoskeleton proteins, such as beta-actin and NCKAP1L, are occurring [54] and may explain its absence in the activated cell state. Heat shock 70 kDa protein 1-like (HSPA1L) (508), an allelic variant of the HSPA1A, already described  as  downregulated  above,  confirms  the  reduced level of this protein family, reinforcing the aspects related to oxidative damage discussed above.

Yet, desmin (603) is a filament found in neutrophils, like vimentin. It is enriched on activated neutrophils phagosomes [55]  and  connects  to  F-actin,  promoting  formation  of  pseudopods [56] and preventing its detection as unmodified.

Presenting  folding  similarity  with  albumin  and  vitamin D-binding protein, the albumin-like protein (679), found for the  first  time  in  neutrophils,  binds  to  actin  within  the  cytoskeleton  [57]  and  to  C5a,  enhancing  chemotaxis.  After binding,  the  protein  goes  through  proteolytical  processing [58], what could explain its undetectable amounts in neutrophils  after  trauma. Zinc finger FYVE domain 19 (Zfyve19) (680),  also  seen  for  the  first  time  in  neutrophils,  is  a  zinc binding finger protein probably involved in vesicle trafficking and phosphoinositide metabolism. The absence of Zfyve19  in  activated  cells  could  be  due  to  its  proteolytic processing after interaction with phosphatidylinositol 3phosphate followed by recruitment  to  endo-  and  exocytical membranes [59] This finding is reinforced by the FGD1 protein, that presents a FYVE domain[60], also detected only in quiescent cells . Again, this work presents for the first time the  presence  of  a  third  protein,  monoamine  oxidase  type  B (MAOB) (695),  in  the  neutrophil.  This  protein  localizes  at the outer  membrane of mitochondria and the byproducts of the  reaction  catalyzed  by  MAOB  are  reactive  nitrogen  species  (RNS)  and  ROS,  known  inducers  of  mitochondrial

damage and apoptosis [61]. MAOB disappearance after neutrophil  activation  could  be  associated  to  the  increased  free radicals generated in the granules during this leukocyte state.

In antibodies,  the  Fab region opsonizes the antigen, and the Fc  region is a ligand for the Fc glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPFFB+Symbol&gt; glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPFFB+Symbol&gt; receptor, presented as Fc RIII on the quiescent polymorphonuclear leukocyte surglyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPFFB+Symbol&gt; face [7]. Upon activation of neutrophils, or during apoptosis, Fc RIII  is  released  from  the  cell  surface  by  proteolytic glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPFFB+Symbol&gt; cleavage,  and  the  enzyme  responsible  for  this  process  is probably a membrane-bound metalloprotease released from granules  [62].  The  finding  of  antibody-dependent  cellular cytotoxicity  (ADCC)-enhanced Fc  fragment (629) only on glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPFFB+Symbol&gt; the  quiescent  set  is  coherent  with  neutrophil  activation  by trauma  and  consequent  release  of  Fc glyph&lt;c=2,font=/CEPFFB+Symbol&gt; RIII  bound  to  its ligand.

In  a subset  of  ion  channel  proteins,  we  have  found CACNB2  and  CLIC4.  Calcium  channel  voltage-dependent beta-2 subunit (CACNB2) (904) allows calcium influx, participating  on  the  activation  of  NADPH  oxidase,  adhesion, degranulation and synthesis of IL-8 [63]. The filling of intracellular  Ca +2 stores  involves  physical  coupling  at  plasma membranes of the calcium channel proteins with IP3 (inositol triphosphate) receptors and this fact could be the explanation for  the  absence  of  CACNB2  in  activated  neutrophils  [64]. Chloride  intracellular  channel  4  (CLIC4)  (982)  is  an  anion exchanger  channel  for  a  proper  cytoplasmic  or  phagosome acidification, through a Cl /H  antiporter activity [65]. Varia--+ tions  in  intracellular  pH  allowed by  CLIC4  modulate  adhesion,  chemotaxis,  phagocytosis,  secretion  of  enzymes  and ROS production in neutrophils. Since chloride channels operate in neutrophils  after glyph&lt;c=1,font=/CEPFFB+Symbol&gt; 2 -integrins cross linking [66], we hypothesize that CLIC4 could be undetectable in stimulated cells  due  to  its  interaction  with  integrins.  The  finding  for CLIC4  is  supported  by  the  observed  downregulation  of GSTP1, its structural homolog.

In summary, although recent intensive study has clarified many events involving the role of neutrophils in the inflammatory  response,  many  questions  remain  to  be  answered. Our results show differences between the proteomic patterns of  quiescent  and  the  trauma-induced  activated  neutrophils, with  some  proteins  described  here  for  the  first  time  (albumin-like,  Zfyve19  and  MAOB)  as  associated  with  either quiescent  or  trauma-activated  neutrophils.  As  illustrated  by Fig. ( 2 ), among the identified proteins, a considerable subset is related to cytoskeletal reorganization, or cell motility and adhesion (L-plastin, vimentin, beta-actin, RhoGDI, NCKAP1L  and  desmin).  Some,  such  as  grancalcin,  S100A9,  CACNB2  and  CLIC4  reinforce  observed  correlations between  motility  and  ion  flux.  Another  group  of  identified proteins  contains  SNAP,  ANXA3  and  Zfyve19,  which  are involved in vesicular transport and exocytosis.

We  have  presented  evidence  that  activated  neutrophils may  have  diminished  protection  against  oxidative  damage and  are prone to apoptosis, through  downregulation  of GSTP1, UCH-L5 and HSPA1A, upregulation of PPA1, and absence  of  HSPA1L  and  MAOB.  Quantitative  changes  in translational and repair proteins also support this hypothesis.

Figure 2. Functional categories of the 29 identified neutrophil proteins.

<!-- image -->

## CONCLUSION

In conclusion, the results of this study allowed the identification of a set of differences between the proteomic pattern of  quiescent  and  trauma-activated  neutrophils.  Some  of  the identified proteins are involved  in the neutrophil cytoskeleton reorganization, others suggest that the neutrophil is a cell with  diminished  protection  against  oxidative  damage  and prone  to  apoptosis  at  the  initial  hours  after  trauma.  Some proteins were described for the first time in neutrophils. Our findings  may  contribute  to  the  development  of  laboratory and clinical  strategies  for  controlling  deleterious  inflammatory responses, as seen after severe trauma and sepsis.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This  study  was  supported  by  FINEP,  CNPq,  FAP-DF, FINATEC and FUB/UnB - Brazil.

## REFERENCES

- [1] Lenz,  A.;  Franklin,  G.A.;  Cheadle,  W.G.  Systemic  inflammation after trauma. Int. J. Care Injured , 2007 , 38 , 1336-1345.
- [2] Fontes, B.; Fontes, W.; Utiyama, E.M.; Birolini, D. The efficacy of loop  colostomy  for  complete  fecal  diversion. Dis.  Colon  Rectum , 1988 , 31 , 298-302.
- [3] Keel,  M.;  Trentz,  O.  Pathophysiology of  polytrauma. Int.  J.  Care Injured , 2005 , 36 , 691-709.
- [4] Fontes, B.; Ferreira Filho, A.A.; Carelli, C.R.; Fontes, W.; Birolini, D.; Bevilacqua, R.J. Percutaneous catheterization of the subclavian vein  in  hemophiliac patients:  report  of 47 cases. Int.  Surg. , 1992 , 77 , 118-121.
- [5] Flohé, S.; Flohé, S.B.; Schade, F.U.; Waydhas,  C.  Immune response  of severely injured patients -influence of surgical intervention  and  therapeutic  impact. Langenbecks  Arch.  Surg. , 2007 , 392 , 639-648.
- [6] Castro,  M.S.; Sa, N.M.;  Gadelha,  R.P.;  Sousa,  M.V.;  Ricart, C.A.O.; Fontes, B.; Fontes, W. Proteome analysis of resting human neutrophils. Protein Pept. Lett. , 2006 , 13 , 481-487.
- [7] Davis,  B.H.;  Olsen,  S.H.;  Ahmad,  E.;  Bigelow,  N.C.  Neutrophil CD64 Is an Improved Indicator of Infection or Sepsis in Emergency  Department  Patients. Arch.  Pathol.  Lab.  Med. , 2006 , 130 , 654-661.
- [8] Fessler,  M.B.;  Malcolm,  K.C.;  Duncan,  M.W.;  Worthen,  G.S.  A genomic  and  proteomic analysis of activation of the human neutrophil by lipopolysaccharide and its mediation by p38 mitogenactivated protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. , 2002 , 277 , 31291-31302.
- [9] Baker,  S.P.;  O'Neill,  B.;  Haddon,  W.;  Long,  W.B.  The  Injury Severity  Score:  a  method  for  describing  patients  with  multiple injuries and evaluating emergency care. J. Trauma , 1974 , 14 , 187196.
- [10] Castro, M.S.; Sa, N.M.; Gadelha, R.P.; Sousa, M.V.; Ricart, C.A.; Fontes, B.; Fontes, W.  Proteome  analysis of resting human neutrophils. Protein Pept. Lett. , 2006. , 13. , 481-487.
- [11] Ramagli,  L.S.  Quantifying  protein  in  2-D  PAGE  solubilization buffers. Methods Mol. Biol. , 1999 , 112 , 99-103.
- [12] Gorg,  A.;  Obermaier,  C.;  Boguth,  G.;  Harder,  A.;  Scheibe,  B.; Wildgruber,  R.;  Weiss,  W.  The  current  state  of  two-dimensional electrophoresis  with  immobilized  pH  gradients. Electrophoresis , 2000 , 21 , 1037-1053.
- [13] Chevallet, M.; Diemer, H.; Luche, S.; van Dorsselaer, A.; Rabilloud, T.; Leize-Wagner,  E.  Improved  mass  spectrometry compatibility is afforded by ammoniacal silver staining. Proteomics , 2006 , 6 , 2350-2354.
- [14] Chich,  J.F.;  David,  O.;  Villers,  F.;  Schaeffer,  B.;  Lutomski,  D.; Huet,  S.  Statistics  for  proteomics:  experimental  design  and  2-DE differential  analysis. J.  Chromatogr.  B  Analyt.  Technol.  Biomed. Life Sci. , 2007 , 849 , 261-272.
- [15] Biron,  D.G.;  Brun,  C.;  Lefevre,  T.;  Lebarbenchon,  C.;  Loxdale, H.D.;  Chevenet,  F.;  Brizard,  J.P.;  Thomas,  F.  The  pitfalls  of proteomics  experiments  without  the  correct  use  of  bioinformatics tools. Proteomics , 2006 , 6 , 5577-5596.
- [16] Magalhães,  A.D.; Charneau,  S.O.;  Paba,  J.; Guércio,  R.A.P.; Teixeira, A.R.L.; Santana, J.M.; Sousa, M.V.;  Ricart, C.A.O. Trypanosoma cruzi alkaline 2-DE: Optimization and application to comparative proteome analysis of  flagellate  life  stages. Proteome Sci. , 2008 , 6 , 24-36.

- [17] Paba,  J.;  Santana,  J.M.;  Teixeira,  A.R.;  Fontes,  W.;  Sousa,  M.V.; Ricart, C.A.O. Proteomic analysis of the human pathogen Trypanosoma cruzi. Proteomics , 2004 , 4 , 1052-1059.
- [18] Zhang, X.; Shi, L.;  Shu, S.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, K.; Xu, N.;  Liu, S.; Roepstorff,  P.  An  improved  method  of  sample  preparation  on AnchorChip targets for MALDI-MS and MS/MS and its application  in  the  liver  proteome  project. Proteomics , 2007 , 14 , 2340-2349.
- [19] Suckau, D.; Resemann,  A.; Schuerenberg, M.; Hufnagel, P.; Franzen,  J.;  Holle,  A.  A  novel  MALDI  LIFT-TOF/TOF  mass spectrometer  for  proteomics. Anal.  Bioanal.  Chem. , 2003 , 376 , 952-965.
- [20] Johnson, M.; Zaretskaya, I.; Raytselis, Y.; Merezhuk, Y.; McGinnis, S.; Madden, T.L. NCBI BLAST: a better web interface. Nucleic Acids Res. , 2008 , 36 , 5-9.
- [21] Adams,  J.M.;  Hauser,  C.J.;  Fekete,  Z.;  Livingston,  D.H.;  Deitch, E.A.  G-Protein  Receptor  Responses  in  Trauma  Neutrophils. J. Trauma , 2000 , 49 , 1096-1101.
- [22] Botha,  A.J.;  Moore,  F.A.;  Moore,  E.E.;  Fontes,  B.;  Banerjee,  A.; Peterson, V.M. Postinjury neutrophil priming and activation states: therapeutic challenges. Shock , 1995 , 3 , 157-166.
- [23] Borregaard,  N.  and  Herlin,  T.  Energy  Metabolism  of  Human Neutrophils  during  Phagocytosis. J.  Clin.  Invest. , 1982 , 70 ,  550557.
- [24] Ilina,  Y. Institut für  Biochemie , Universität  Stuttgart,  Stuttgart 2005 , p. 98.
- [25] Qiu, X.B.; Ouyang, S.Y.; Li,  C.J.; Miao,  S.; Wang, L.; Goldberg, A.L.  hRpn13/ADRM1/GP110  is  a  novel  proteasome  subunit  that binds  the  deubiquitinating  enzyme,  UCH37. EMBO J. , 2006 , 25 , 5742-5753.
- [26] Yao, T.; Song, L.; Jin, J.; Cai, Y.; Takahashi, H.; Swanson, S.K.; Washburn, M.P.; Florens, L.; Conaway, R.C.; Cohen, R.E.; Conaway, J.W. Distinct modes  of regulation of the Uch37 deubiquitinating  enzyme  in  the  proteasome  and  in  the  Ino80 chromatin-remodeling complex. Mol. Cell , 2008 , 31 , 909-917.
- [27] Hossain, M.A.; Claggett, J.M.; Nguyen, T.; Johnson, T.L. The cap binding  complex  influences  H2B  ubiquitination  by  facilitating splicing of the SUS1 pre-mRNA. RNA , 2009 , 15 , 1515-1527.
- [28] Janji,  B.;  Giganti,  A.;  De  Corte,  V.;  Catillon,  M.;  Bruyneel,  E.; Lentz, D.; Plastino, J.; Gettemans, J.; Friederich, E. Phosphorylation  on  Ser5  increases  the  F-actin-binding  activity  of  Lplastin and promotes its targeting to sites of actin assembly in cells. J. Cell Sci. , 2006 , 119 , 1947-1960.
- [29] Mor-Vaknin,  N.;  Punturieri,  A.;  Sitwala,  K.;  Markovitz,  D.M. Vimentin  is  secreted  by  activated  macrophages. Nat.  Cell  Biol. , 2003 , 5 , 59-63.
- [30] Cicchetti,  G.;  Allen,  P.G.;  Glogauer,  M.  Chemotactic  signaling pathways in neutrophils: from receptor to actin assembly. Crit. Rev. Oral Biol. Med. , 2002 , 13 , 220-228.
- [31] Suchard,  S.J.  and  Boxer,  L.A.  Characterization  and  Cytoskeletal Association  of  a  Major  Cell  Surface  Glycoprotein,  GP  140,  in Human Neutrophils. J. Clin. Invest. , 1989 , 84 , 484-492.
- [32] Mambole,  A.;  Baruch,  D.;  Nusbaum,  P.;  Bigot,  S.;  Suzuki,  M.; Lesavre, P.; Fukuda, M.; Halbwachs-Mecarelli, L. The Cleavage of Neutrophil Leukosialin (CD43)  by  Cathepsin G  Releases Its Extracellular  Domain  and  Triggers  Its  Intramembrane  Proteolysis by Presenilin/Gamma-Secretase. J. Biol. Chem. , 2008 , 283 , 2362723635.
- [33] Fessler, M.B.;  Malcolm,  K.C.;  Duncan,  M.W.;  Worthen,  G.S. Lipopolysaccharide stimulation of the human neutrophil: an analysis of changes in gene transcription and protein expression by oligonucleotide microarrays and proteomics. Chest , 2002 , 121 , 7576.
- [34] Bohnsack,  J.F.;  Akiyama,  S.K.;  Damsky,  C.H.;  Knape,  W.A.; Zimmerman, G.A. Human neutrophil adherence to laminin in vitro. Evidence for a distinct neutrophil integrin receptor for laminin. J. Exp. Med. , 1990 , 171 , 1221-1237.
- [35] Sixt,  M.;  Hallmann,  R.;  Wendler,  O.;  Scharffetter-Kochanek,  K.; Sorokin,  L.M.  Cell  adhesion  and  migration  properties  of  beta  2integrin negative polymorphonuclear granulocytes on defined extracellular matrix molecules. Relevance for leukocyte extravasation. J. Biol. Chem. , 2001 , 276 , 18878-18887.
- [36] Terranova, V.P.;  DiFlorio, R.; Hujanen, E.S.; Lyall, R.M.; Liotta, L.A.;  Thorgeirsson,  U.;  Siegal,  G.P.;  Schiffmann,  E.  Laminin Promotes  Rabbit  Neutrophil  Motility  and  Attachment. J. Clin. Invest. , 1986 , 77 , 1180-1186.
- [37] Roes, J.; Choi, B.K.; Power, D.; Xu, P.; Segal, A.W. Granulocyte Function in Grancalcin-Deficient Mice. Mol. Cell Biol. , 2003 , 23 , 826-830.
- [38] Xu, P.; Roes, J.; Segal, A.W.; Radulovic, M. The role of grancalcin in adhesion of neutrophils. Cell Immunol. , 2006 , 240 , 116-121.
- [39] Lollike, K.; Johnsen, A.H.; Durussel, I.; Borregaard, N.; Cox, J.A. Biochemical Characterization of the Penta-EF-hand Protein Grancalcin and Identification of L-plastin as a Binding Partner. J. Biol. Chem. , 2001 , 276 , 17762-17769.
- [40] Vogl,  T.;  Ludwig,  S.;  Goebeler,  M.; Strey, A.; Thorey,  I.S.; Reichelt,  R.;  Foell,  D.;  Gerke,  V.;  Manitz,  M.P.;  Nacken,  W.; Werner, S.; Sorg, C.; Roth, J. MRP8  and  MRP14  control microtubule  reorganization  during  transendothelial  migration  of phagocytes. Blood , 2004 , 104 , 4260-4268.
- [41] Viemann, D.; Strey, A.; Janning, A.; Jurk, K.; Klimmek, K.; Vogl, T.;  Hirono, K.; Ichida,  F.; Foell, D.; Kehrel,  B.; Gerke, V.; Sorg, C.;  Roth,  J.  Myeloid-related  proteins  8  and  14  induce  a  specific inflammatory  response  in  human  microvascular  endothelial  cells. Blood , 2005 , 105 , 2955-2962.
- [42] Simard,  J.C.;  Girard,  D.;  Tessier,  P.A.  Induction  of  neutrophil degranulation  by  S100A9  via  a  MAPK-dependent  mechanism. J. Leukoc. Biol. , 2010 , 87 , 905-914.
- [43] Le Cabec, V.; Maridonneau-Parini, I. Annexin 3 is associated with cytoplasmic granules in neutrophils and monocytes and translocates  to  the  plasma  membrane  in  activated  cells. Biochem. J. , 1994 , 303 , 481-487.
- [44] Abonyo,  B.O.;  Wang,  P.;  Narasaraju,  T.A.;  Rowan  III,  W.H.; McMillan,  D.H.;  Zimmerman,  U.J.;  Liu,  L.  Characterization  of Alpha-Soluble N-Ethylmaleimide-Sensitive Fusion Attachment Protein in Alveolar Type II Cells Implications in Lung Surfactant Secretion. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. , 2003 , 29 , 273-282.
- [45] Keller,  S.;  Sanderson,  M.P.;  Stoeck,  A.;  Altevogt,  P.  Exosomes: from  biogenesis  and  secretion  to  biological  function. Immunol. Lett. , 2006 , 107 , 102-108.
- [46] Vos, M.J.; Hageman, J.; Carra, S.; Kampinga, H.H. Structural and functional  diversities between  members  of  the  human  HSPB, HSPH, HSPA, and DNAJ chaperone families. Biochemistry , 2008 , 47 , 7001-7011.
- [47] Oppenheim, J.J.; Dong, H.F.; Plotz, P.;  Caspi, R.R.; Dykstra, M.; Pierce,  S.;  Martin,  R.;  Carlos,  C.;  Finn,  O.;  Koul,  O.;  Howard, O.M.Z.  Autoantigens  act  as  tissue-specific  chemoattractants. J. Leukoc. Biol , 2005 , 77 , 854-861.
- [48] Yin, Z.; Ivanov, V.N.; Habelhah, H.; Tew, K.; Ronai, Z. Glutathione S-Transferase p Elicits Protection against H2O2induced Cell Death via Coordinated Regulation of Stress Kinases. Cancer Res. , 2000 , 60 , 4053-4057.
- [49] Tolias, K.F.; Couvillon, A.D.; Cantley, L.C.; Carpenter, C.L. Characterization  of  a  Rac1-  and  RhoGDI-associated  lipid  kinase signaling complex. Mol. Cell Biol. , 1998 , 18 , 762-770.
- [50] Bokoch,  G.M.  Bohl, B.P.; Chuang,  T.H. Guanine  nucleotide exchange  regulates  membrane  translocation  of  Rac/Rho  GTPbinding proteins. J. Biol. Chem. , 1994 , 269 , 31674-31679.
- [51] Dovas, A. and Couchman, J.R. RhoGDI: multiple functions in the regulation of Rho family GTPase activities. Biochem. J. , 2005 , 390 , 1-9.
- [52] Lindemann,  S.W.;  Yost,  C.C.;  Denis,  M.M.;  McIntyre,  T.M.; Weyrich, A.S.; Zimmerman, G.A. Neutrophils alter the inflammatory milieu by signal-dependent translation of constitutive messenger RNAs. PNAS , 2004 , 101 , 7076-7081.
- [53] Weiner, O.D.; Rentel, M.C.; Ott, A.; Brown, G.E.; Jedrychowski, M.; Yaffe, M.B.; Gygi, S.P.; Cantley, L.C.; Bourne, H.R.; Kirschner, M.W. Hem-1 Complexes Are Essential for Rac Activation,  Actin  Polymerization,  and  Myosin  Regulation  during Neutrophil Chemotaxis. PLoS Biol. , 2006 , 4 , 186-199.
- [54] Weiner, O.D.; Marganski, W.A.; Wu,  L.F.; Altschuler, S.J.; Kirschner, M.W. An Actin-Based Wave Generator Organizes Cell Motility. PLoS Biol. , 2007 , 5 , 2053-2063.
- [55] Burlak, C.; Whitney, A.R.; Mead, D.J.; Hackstadt, T.; DeLeo, F.R. Maturation  of  Human  Neutrophil  Phagosomes  Includes  Incorporation  of  Molecular  Chaperones  and  Endoplasmic  Reticulum Quality  Control  Machinery. Mol.  Cell  Proteomics , 2006 , 5 ,  620634.
- [56] Kreienbuhl, P.; Keller, H.; Niggli, V. Protein Phosphatase Inhibitors Okadaic Acid and Calyculin A Alter Cell Shape and FActin  Distribution  and  Inhibit  Stimulus-Dependent  Increases  in

- Cytoskeletal Actin of Human Neutrophils. Blood , 1992 , 80 ,  29112919.
- [57] Cooke, N.E. Rat vitamin D binding protein. Determination of the full-length  primary  structure  from  cloned  cDNA. J.  Biol.  Chem. , 1986 , 261 , 3441-3450.
- [58] Zhang, J. and Kew, R.R. Identification of a Region in the Vitamin D-binding  Protein  that  Mediates  Its  C5a  Chemotactic  Cofactor Function. J. Biol. Chem. , 2004 , 279 , 53282-53287.
- [59] Kutateladze, T.G. Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate  recognition and  membrane docking by the FYVE domain. Biochim.  Biophys. Acta , 2006 , 1761 , 868-877.
- [60] Pasteris,  N.G.;  Cadle,  A.;  Logie,  L.J.;  Porteous,  M.E.;  Schwartz, C.E.;  Stevenson,  R.E.;  Glover,  T.;  W.;  Wilroy,  R.S.;  Gorski,  J.L. Isolation and characterization of the faciogenital dysplasia (Aarskog-Scott syndrome) gene: a putative Rho/Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor. Cell , 1994 , 79 , 669-678.
- [61] Bortolato, M.; Chen, K.; Shih, J.C. Monoamine oxidase inactivation: from  pathophysiology  to  therapeutics. Adv.  Drug Deliv. Rev. , 2008 , 60 , 1527-1533.

- [62] Middelhoven, P.J.; Ager, A.; Roos, D.; Verhoeven, A.J. Involvement  of  a  metalloprotease  in the shedding  of  human neutrophil Fc gammaRIIIB. FEBS Lett. , 1997 , 414 , 14-18.
- [63] Correll,  R.N.;  Pang,  C.;  Niedowicz,  D.M.;  Finlin,  B.S.;  Andres, D.A.  The  RGK  family  of  GTP-binding  Proteins:  Regulators  of Voltage-dependent Calcium Channels and Cytoskeleton Remodeling. Cell Signal , 2008 , 20 , 292-300.
- [64] Tintinger,  G.;  Steel,  H.C.;  Anderson,  R.  Taming  the  neutrophil: calcium  clearance  and  influx  mechanisms  as  novel  targets  for pharmacological control. Clin. Exp. Immunol. , 2005 , 141 , 191-200.
- [65] Zifarelli, G. and Pusch, M. CLC chloride channels and transporters: a biophysical and physiological perspective. Rev. Physiol. Biochem. Pharmacol. , 2007 , 158 , 23-76.
- [66] Menegazzi,  R.;  Busetto,  S.;  Decleva,  E.;  Cramer,  R.;  Dri,  P.; Patriarca, P. Triggering  of Chloride  Ion Efflux from  Human Neutrophils  as a Novel  Function  of  Leukocyte  ß2  Integrins: Relationship  with  Spreading  and  Activation  of  the  Respiratory Burst. J. Immunol. , 1999 , 162 , 423-434.