## Vol 9 No 5 Research article

<!-- image -->

## Expression and regulation of CCL18 in synovial fluid neutrophils of patients with rheumatoid arthritis

Judith Auer 1 , Markus Bläss 2 , Hendrik Schulze-Koops 3,4 , Stefan Russwurm 2,5 , Thomas Nagel 3 , Joachim R Kalden 3 , Martin Röllinghoff 1  and Horst Ulrich Beuscher 1

1 Institute for Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Wasserturmstrasse 3-5, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany

2 SIRS-Lab GmbH, Winzerlaer Strasse 2, D-07745 Jena, Germany

- 3 Department of Internal Medicine III and Institute for Clinical Immunology, Rheumatology and Onkology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Krankenhausstrasse 12, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany
- 4 Nikolaus Fiebiger Centre for Molecular Medicine, Clinical Research Group III, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Glücksstrasse 5, D-91054

Erlangen, Germany

5 Clinics of Anesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, Friedrich-Schiller-University of Jena, Bachstrasse 18, D-07743 Jena, Germany

Corresponding author: Horst Ulrich Beuscher, beuscher@mikrobio.med.uni-erlangen.de

Received: 12 Feb 2007 Revisions requested: 22 Mar 2007 Revisions received: 17 Aug 2007 Accepted: 17 Sep 2007 Published: 17 Sep 2007

Arthritis Research &amp; Therapy 2007, 9 :R94 (doi:10.1186/ar2294)

This article is online at: http://arthritis-research.com/content/9/5/R94

© 2007 Auer et al ; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by the recruitment of leukocytes  and  the  accumulation  of  inflammatory  mediators within  the  synovial  compartment.  Release  of  the  chemokine CCL18 has been widely attributed to antigen-presenting cells, including macrophages and dendritic cells. This study investigates  the  production  of  CCL18  in  polymorphonuclear neutrophils  (PMN),  the  predominant  cell  type  recruited  into synovial  fluid  (SF).  Microarray  analysis,  semiquantitative  and quantitative  reverse  transcriptase  polymerase  chain  reaction identified SF PMN from patients with RA as a novel source for CCL18  in  diseased  joints.  Highly  upregulated  expression  of other chemokine genes was observed for CCL3, CXCL8 and CXCL10, whereas CCL21 was downregulated. The chemokine

receptor genes were differentially expressed, with upregulation of CXCR4, CCRL2 and CCR5 and downregulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2. In cell culture experiments, expression of CCL18 mRNA in blood PMN was induced by tumor necrosis factor α , whereas synthesis of CCL18  protein required additional stimulation  with  a  combination  of  IL-10  and  vitamin  D .  In 3 comparison,  recruited  SF  PMN  from  patients  with  RA  were sensitized  for  CCL18  production,  because  IL-10  alone  was sufficient  to  induce  CCL18  release.  These  results  suggest  a release of the T cell-attracting CCL18 by PMN when recruited to diseased joints. However, its production is tightly regulated at the levels of mRNA expression and protein synthesis.

## Introduction

Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) are effector cells during  inflammation,  and  their  migration  to  sites  of  infection  is essential  in  controlling  microbial  growth  and  dissemination [1,2].  Neutrophilic  infiltration  has,  however,  also  been  implicated in the pathology of various acute and chronic inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), gouty arthritis and Crohn's disease [3-5]. In RA, PMN are highly abundant in synovial  fluid  (SF)  during  acute  flares  of  the  disease  [6].  In addition,  PMN  have been  detected  at  the  pannus-cartilage

junction at sites of erosion, suggesting that they contribute to cartilage  destruction  through  the  release  of  their  proteolytic contents [7,8]. Moreover,  PMN  obtained  from  SF  from patients with RA were found to produce a number of cytokines and chemotactic factors involved in the recruitment of inflammatory cells [9,10]. Because PMN are among the first cells to arrive at an inflammatory site, these observations raise the possibility that SF PMN may be able to perpetuate the inflammatory  process  through  the  release  of  inflammatory  mediators such as cytokines and chemokines.

APC = allophycocyanin; DC = dendritic cell; DMEM = Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium; ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; FCS = fetal calf serum; IL = interleukin; PBMC = peripheral blood mononuclear cells; PBS = phosphate-buffered saline; PMN = polymorphonuclear neutrophils; RA = rheumatoid arthritis; RT-PCR = reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; SF = synovial fluid; TNF = tumor necrosis factor.

Chemokines are a superfamily of more than 50 different chemotactic proteins participating in the cellular traffic of immune and inflammatory responses [11]. They are categorized into at least four subfamilies, namely C, CC, CXC and CX3C, distinguished by the presence or absence of a residue (X) between two conserved cysteine residues in the N terminus. Chemokines range in size from 8 to 10 kDa and are produced by a wide  variety  of  cell  types  [10,12].  Their  production  either occurs constitutively or may be induced by appropriate stimulation  with  exogenous  or  endogenous  agents,  such  as  the proinflammatory cytokines IL-1 and TNFα [13]. Chemokines are known to exert their biological effects on various cell types through binding to G-protein-coupled cell surface receptors with seven transmembrane domains [14]. Chemokine receptors may be specific for one ligand or they may bind several chemokines  [15],  thus  allowing  redundancy  of  the  system. During activation of PMN, expression of CC chemokine receptors is upregulated, whereas that of some CXC receptors is downregulated [16]. Regulation of chemokine activities therefore occurs at the levels of receptor expression as well as ligand production.

CCL18,  also  named  pulmonary  and  activation-regulated chemokine  (PARC),  dendritic  cell-derived  CC  chemokine-1 (DC-CK1), alternative macrophage activation-associated CC chemokine-1  (AMAC-1)  and  macrophage  inflammatory  protein-4 (MIP-4), has been described to attract naïve T cells and mantle-zone B cells [17]. Cellular sources of CCL18 are primarily monocytes/macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs). Its production  occurs  constitutively  but  may  be  increased  by additional stimulation with cytokines such as IL-10 and IL-4 as well as vitamin D 3 [18,19]. In RA, expression of mRNA encoding CCL18 was observed in synovial tissue and it coincided with CCL18 accumulation in SF [19,20].

The present study used a broad-scale experimental approach, involving  microarray  and  quantitative  RT-PCR  analyses,  to determine whether PMN can serve as a site for CCL18 production  in  RA.  The  results  demonstrate  that  SF  PMN  from patients with RA are a cellular source for CCL18, the production of which is differentially regulated at the levels of mRNA expression  and  protein  synthesis.  Moreover,  because  PMN are recruited into SF, a characteristic chemokine expression profile is induced with highly upregulated mRNAs for CCL3, CCL18, CXCL8 and CXCL10 and downregulation of CCL21 mRNA.

## Materials and methods Patients

SF samples were taken from knees of nine patients with active RA, for treatment and diagnostic purposes. Aliquots of these samples  and  EDTA-treated  blood  from  these  patients  were used in this study after informed consent had been obtained. Four patients were receiving anti-TNFα therapy, three were being  treated  with  conventional  therapy  (nonsteroidal  anti-

## Clinical data for patients with RA and healthy donors providing samples for microarray analysis

Table 1

| Subject       | Sex           | Age (years)   | Medication                                 |
|---------------|---------------|---------------|--------------------------------------------|
| RA patient    | RA patient    | RA patient    | RA patient                                 |
| 1             | Female        | 55            | NSAID (diclofenac)                         |
| 2             | Female        | 53            | None                                       |
| 3             | Female        | 72            | Anti-TNF- α  (adalimumab)                  |
| 4             | Female        | ND            | None                                       |
| 5             | Female        | 44            | Anti-TNF- α  (infliximab)                  |
| 6             | Female        | 80            | DMARDs (methotrexate and  resochine)       |
| 7             | Female        | 35            | Anti-TNF- α  (infliximab)                  |
| 8             | Male          | 61            | Anti-TNF- α  (infliximab)                  |
| 9             | Male          | 51            | DMARD (methotrexate); steroid  (cortisone) |
| Healthy donor | Healthy donor | Healthy donor | Healthy donor                              |
| 1             | Female        | 30            | None                                       |
| 2             | Female        | 26            | None                                       |
| 3             | Female        | 38            | None                                       |
| 4             | Male          | 27            | None                                       |

RA, rheumatoid arthritis; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; DMARD, disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug; ND, not determined.

inflammatory  drugs,  steroids  or  disease-modifying  anti-rheumatic drugs), and two patients were receiving no medication at  the  time  of  synovial  effusion  although  those  had  been treated earlier (Table 1). Hence, all patients did not respond sufficiently to the therapeutic treatment.

## Purification of mononuclear cells and PMN from blood and SF

Purification of mononuclear cells (peripheral blood mononuclear cells; PBMC) and PMN from blood was performed as described [21], with minor modifications. For sedimentation of erythrocytes, 1 volume of EDTA-treated blood was incubated with 1 volume of 3% dextran T500 (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) in  PBS (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany) for 20 minutes at 4°C. The leucocyte-rich supernatant was centrifuged at 500 g for 10 minutes at 6°C in a Multifuge (Heraeus, Hanau, Germany). The pellet was resuspended in PBS, overlaid on an isotonic discontinous Percoll gradient (Amersham Biosciences, Freiburg, Germany) with densities of 1.075 g/ml and 1.09 g/ ml and centrifuged at 750 g for 25 minutes at 6°C. PBMC or PMN were collected at the relevant interphase and washed twice with PBS. With the exception of dextran sedimentation, the preparation of SF PMN was performed similarly. Cell-free SF was obtained by centrifugation of SF at 750 g for 25 minutes and stored at -70°C in aliquots until use. PMN and mononuclear cells were counted in SF from patients with RA. The

ratio between PMN and mononuclear cells was approximately 1:10.

## Flow cytometry

The purity of PMN was routinely analyzed by flow cytometry with FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany). In brief, to prevent nonspecific binding, 3 × 10 5  cells were preincubated  for  10  minutes  with  heat-inactivated  (20  minutes, 56°C) human serum and were then incubated with a combination of fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated CD66b antibody (Immunotech, Hamburg, Germany) and allophycocyanin (APC)-conjugated  CD14  antibody  (Caltag,  Hamburg,  Germany). After 30 minutes at 4°C, cells were washed twice with PBS/1% FCS (Sigma, Deisenhofen, Germany) and kept on ice until analysis. Data were analyzed with CellQuest software (BD Biosciences), revealing a purity of 98 to 99% CD66bpositive PMN with a contamination of less than 0.05% CD14positive and CD66b-negative cells. Analysis of PMN preparations of three donors with anti-CD56-APC (BD Biosciences), anti-CD3-phycoerythrin (Caltag) and anti-CD19-APC (Caltag) revealed 0.01 to 0.04% natural killer cells, 0.06 to 0.33% T cells and up to 0.06% B cells. In addition, PMN preparations were subjected to histochemistry (Diff-Quick staining; Dade Behring, Düdingen, Switzerland) showing 1 to 3% eosinophils in each preparation of blood PMN. Selected cell culture experiments  were  performed  with  PMN  preparations  depleted  of eosinophils with anti-CD16 antibodies by means of magneticactivated  cell  sorting  (Miltenyi  Biotec,  Bergisch  Gladbach, Germany) to exclude the possibility that contaminating eosinophils accounted for CCL18 production. Notably, no eosinophils were detectable in preparations of SF PMN.

## Cell culture

For  culturing  PMN,  RPMI  1640  containing  L-glutamine  and sodium bicarbonate (Sigma) was supplemented with 5 mM HEPES (Sigma), 100 IU/ml penicillin, 100 μ g/ml streptomycin (Sigma)  and  10%  FCS.  For  pretreatment  of  PMN  with  SF, blood PMN from healthy donors were seeded in six-well-plates (Corning Costar, Bodenheim, Germany) at a density of 5 × 10 7  cells in 5 ml of culture medium or 2.5 ml of culture medium plus 2.5 ml of SF from patients with RA. After 10 hours of incubation,  cells  were  washed  twice.  Pretreated  blood  PMN  as well  as  freshly  isolated  blood  PMN  from  healthy  donors  or blood and SF PMN from patients with RA were seeded in 24well  plates  (Greiner  Bio-One  GmbH,  Frickenhausen,  Germany) at a density of 5 × 10 6  cells in 500 μ l of culture medium with and without 20 ng/ml IL-10 (Endogen, Eching, Germany), 10 -7  M vitamin D 3 (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol; Calbiochem, Darmstadt, Germany) and different concentrations (10, 1, 0.5 and 0.25 ng/ml) of recombinant TNFα (Biolegend,  Eching, Germany). In addition, for co-culture experiments, 5 × 10 5  EAhy.926 human endothelial cells (Department of Experimental Pathology, St Bartholomew's and the Royal London School of Medicine,  London)  were  plated  in  24-well  plates  in  DMEM with  4,500  mg/l  glucose,  L-glutamine,  sodium  bicarbonate

and pyridoxine hydrochloride (Sigma) supplemented with 100 IU/ml penicillin, 100 μ g/ml streptomycin and 10% FCS. After 1 hour of incubation at 37°C, 5% CO 2 and 95% humidity, 5 × 10 5  PBMC or 5 × 10 6  blood PMN from healthy donors were added to a final volume of 500 μ l of DMEM/10% FCS. Additionally  PMN  and  EA-hy.926  cells  were  cultured  in  Boyden chambers,  separated  by  a  transwell  membrane  with  a  pore size  of  0.4 μ m  (Corning  Costar).  For  control  experiments, blood  PMN  or  EA-hy.926  cells  were γ -irradiated  (40  Gy), washed twice after  24  hours  of  incubation  and  co-cultured with vital EA-hy.926 cells or PMN, respectively. After 24 or 48 hours of incubation, cells and supernatants were prepared for subsequent isolation of RNA or ELISA analysis.

## RNA sample preparation

For microarray analysis and RT-PCR, total RNA was extracted from PMN with RNeasy Mini Spin Columns (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. From cell cultures, RNA was prepared with the acid-phenol extraction  procedure  [22].  All  RNA  samples  were  digested with DNAse (DNA-free™ Kit; Ambion, Huntingdon, UK). RNA yields were determined spectrophotometrically by measuring the absorbance at 260 and 280 nm. All RNA samples used for microarray analysis were analyzed with an RNA 6000 Nano Labchip (Agilent Technologies, Böblingen, Germany) for RNA degradation. Only RNA preparations with no detectable degradation were used for microarray analysis.

## Microarray hybridization

Experiments were performed with the Lab-Arraytor ® -60 inflammation microarray (SIRS-Lab, Jena, Germany) comprising 800 probes (each measurement being made in triplicate) addressing 780 transcripts corresponding to inflammation as well as 20 control probes. The microarray data according to Minimal Information  about  a  Microarray  Experiment  (MIAME)  guidelines were deposited in the database ArrayExpress [23] with the accession number E-MEXP-994. RNA samples of SF PMN from  nine  RA  patients  and  of  blood  PMN  from  four  healthy donors (Table 1) were amplified with BD Atlas™ SMART™ Fluorescent  Amplification  Kit  (BD  Biosciences)  in  accordance with  the  manufacturer's  instructions.  cDNAs  were  cleaned with  a  Promega  Wizard  PCR  clean-up  Kit  (Promega,  Mannheim, Germany) and labeled by use of the Dyomics DY-648S-NHS/DY-548-S-NHS  dye  system  (Dyomics,  Jena,  Germany). Dyomics DY-648-S-NHS-labeled cDNA was cohybridized  with  DY-548-S-NHS-labeled  cDNA  obtained  from  the same amount of total RNA isolated from the immature monocytic  cell  line  SigM5  obtained  from  the  German  Resource Centre for Biological Material (DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany) and subjected to culture under standard conditions. After incubation in a hybridization apparatus (HS 400; TECAN Group Ltd, Männedorf, Switzerland), for 10 hours at 42°C in a formamide-based  hybridization  buffer  system,  arrays  were washed  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer's  instructions and  dried;  hybridization  signal  intensities  were  measured

immediately with an array scanner (model Gene Pix 4000B; Axon Instruments, Union City, CA, USA).

## Microarray data preprocessing

Digital images resulting from post-hybridization array scanning were quantified with GenePix Pro 4.0 software (Axon Instruments). GenePix™ Analysis Software was used for spot detection  and  quantification  and  also  for  spot  quality  flagging. Significantly regulated genes were determined by using a twosample permutation test. The threshold of significance for multiple  comparisons  was  defined  with  calculating  the  corresponding q value for each p value [24]. For normalization and variance-stabilized transformation of raw signals the method of Huber and colleagues [25] was used, in which the data were transformed by an arcsinh function; for example, a transformed ratio of ± 0.4 corresponds to approximately 1.5-fold change (almost identical with the natural logarithm). Genes with mean transformed ratios less than -1 and larger than +1 were significantly regulated. Genes were clustered with the Database for Annotation,  Visualization  and  Integrated  Discovery  (DAVID) software [26].

## Semiquantitative and quantitative RT-PCR

Changes in gene expression assessed by microarray analysis were confirmed by semiquantitative and quantitative RT-PCR for  selected  genes,  namely  CXCL10,  CCL18,  CCRL2  and CXCR4. In brief, cDNA was synthesized from 0.5 μ g of total RNA by using 0.5 μ g of oligo(dT) 16-mer primer (Thermo, Ulm, Germany), 0.5 mM dNTP (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany) and 1 unit (U) of Omniscript reverse transcriptase (Qiagen) in a final volume of 25 μ l at 37°C for 60 minutes and at 93°C for 5 minutes. PCR was performed in a 25 μ l reaction mixture containing 2 μ l of cDNA sample, 0.625 U of Taq polymerase (Qiagen),  0.2  mM  dNTPs  (Invitrogen)  and  sense  and  antisense primers  (each  at  0.4 μ M).  Amplification  was  performed  at 95°C for 2 minutes followed by 34 cycles with a denaturing step at 94°C for 1 minute, an annealing step at 55°C for 50 s and an extension step at 72°C for 90 s. A final extension step was  performed  at  72°C  for  7  minutes  on  a  thermocycler (Biozym, Hess. Oldendorf, Germany). Primers for CCRL2 (5'TGA CAA GTA TGA CGC CCA G-3' and 5'-ACC AGG ATA AGC  ACA  ACC  AG-3'),  CCL18  (5'-CTC  CTT  GTC  CTC GTC TGC AC-3' and 5'-TCA GGC ATT CAG CTT CAG GT3'),  CXCR4 [27], CXCL10 [28] and β -actin  [29]  were  purchased from MWG Biotech (Ebersberg, Germany). PCR samples were separated on 2% agarose gels (Roth), revealed by ethidium bromide staining (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and photographed on an ImageMaster VDS (Amersham Biosciences).

Quantitative PCR was performed in a 20 μ l  reaction mixture containing 2 μ l of cDNA (diluted 1:5 in water), 1 U of PlatinumTaq-Polymerase (Invitrogen), 0.5× SYBR-Green (Roche, Mannheim,  Germany), 5% dimethylsulfoxide (Sigma), 0.5 mg/ml bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs, Frankfurt, Ger-

y), 0.25 mM dNTP (Amersham), 4 mM magnesium chloride (Invitrogen) and sense and antisense primers (each at 0.4 μ M). Amplification was performed with a real-time light cycler (Roche)  at  95°C,  10  minutes,  20°C/s  of  preincubation  followed  by  50  cycles  of  denaturing  at  95°C,  15  s,  20°C/s, annealing at 55°C (CCL18) and 56°C (HPRT), 10 s, 20°C/s and extension at 72°C, 15 s, 20°C/s. The melting curve was performed at 95°C, 0 s, 20°C/s followed by 65°C, 15 s, 20°C/ s and 95°C, 0 s, 0.1°C/s. Cooling was done at 40°C, 30 s, 20°C/s. CCL18 values were normalized with HPRT values and are presented as relative gene expression ratios with the 2 ΔΔ Ct method [30]. CCL18 primer (5'-GGG GGC TGG TTT CAG AAT A-3' and 5'-CTC CTT GTC CTC GTC TGC AC-3') and HPRT primer (5'-GAC TTT GCT TTC CTT GGT CA-3' and 5'GGC TTT GTA TTT TGC TTT TCC-3') for quantitative RTPCR  were purchased from MWG  Biotech. All primer sequences  correspond  to  sequences  for  human  cDNAs deposited in GenBank.

## ELISA analysis

CCL18 and TNFα levels in culture supernatants were quantified with human CCL18 and TNFα ELISA (DuoSet ®  ELISA Development  System;  R&amp;D  Systems,  Wiesbaden-Nordenstadt, Germany) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Substrate reagents A and B were from BD Biosciences. The sensitivity of both assays was 5 pg/ml.

## Statistical analysis

All experiments were performed at least three times. The values are expressed as means ± SEM. A Wilcoxon test was used to assess the significance of differences between two conditions. All p values are two-tailed, and p &lt; 0.05 is considered significant.  Statistical  analysis  was  performed  with  the software package provided by Prism 3.0 ® .

## Results

## Expression of CCL18 in SF PMN

RNA preparations were obtained from SF PMN from nine individual patients with RA and from peripheral blood PMN from four  healthy  donors  (Table  1)  and  subjected  to  microarray analysis. Results summarized in Figure 1 show a highly upregulated expression of CCL3 and CCL18 mRNAs, a downregulation  of  CCL21  mRNA  (Figure  1a)  and  an  upregulation  of CXCL8 and CXCL10 mRNAs (Figure 1b) in SF PMN from each  patient  in  comparison  with  blood  PMN  from  healthy donors. As revealed by flow cytometry with CD66b antibodies, SF  PMN  form  one  representative  RA  patient  prepared  for microarray experiments were of 99% purity. Natural killer cells, T cells, B cells and monocytes/macrophages were not detectable (Figure 1c). To validate the microarray data, semiquantitative RT-PCR was performed with the same RNAs as used in the microarray analysis of four randomly selected RA patients (namely nos 1, 2, 7 and 8) and one of the healthy donors (namely no. 2). As shown in Figure 2a, mRNA expression for two selected chemokines, CCL18 and CXCL10, was

Microarray analysis of chemokine gene expression in synovial fluid polymorphonuclear neutrophils. RNA of SF synovial fluid polymorphonuclear neutrophils (SF PMN) from nine patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) was analyzed for the expression of CC chemokines (a) and CXC, C and CX3C chemokines (b) . Data obtained by Gene Pix™ Analysis Software were normalized, transformed and denoted as  -fold regulation versus the expresx sion of blood PMN from healthy donors. Bars represent the median expression between nine RNA samples. Genes with median expression ratios less than -1 or more than +1 were significantly regulated. (c) SF PMN from one representative patient with RA (no. 2) were subjected to flow cytometry with fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-CD66b, allophycocyanin (APC)-conjugated anti-CD56, phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated antiCD3, anti-CD19-APC and anti-CD14-APC antibodies.

<!-- image -->

readily detectable in SF PMN but remained undetectable in peripheral  blood  PMN  from  the  healthy  donor.  In  addition, quantitative RT-PCR revealed changes in CCL18 expression in SF PMN from RA patients ( n = 9; Figure 2b) similar to those observed with microarray analysis. These data indicate that the microarray  analysis  reflects  a  true  transcriptional  profile  of chemokines  in  SF  PMN.  Differences  observed  in  CCL18 mRNA expression levels in SF PMN between individual RA patients did not relate to the actual therapeutic treatment ( p = 0.2612, none versus conventional therapy; p = 0.3798, none versus  anti-TNF  therapy)  as  determined  by  quantitative  RT-

PCR (data not shown). Notably, no significant levels of CCL18 mRNA were detectable in blood PMN form RA patients ( n = 9; Figure 2b), suggesting that CCL18 gene expression in SF PMN occurs as a result of the recruitment of PMN into the inflammatory milieu of the joint.

## Differential expression of chemokine receptors in SF PMN

To  estimate  changes  in  the  responsiveness  of  SF  PMN  to chemokine ligands, expression levels of chemokine receptor mRNAs were determined by microarray analysis as described

Figure 2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Semiquantitative and quantitative RT-PCR analysis of CCL18 mRNA in polymorphonucle r neutrophils polymorphonuclear neutrophils. (a) Total RNA from synovial fluid polymorphonuclear neutrophils (SF PMN) of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients nos 1, 2, 7 and 8 and from blood PMN from healthy donor no. 2 was amplified by semiquantitative RT-PCR with primers for CCL18, CXCL10 and actin and subjected to agarose gel electrophoresis. PCR was repeated twice. (b) Total RNA from blood and SF PMN from patients with RA ( n = 9) and from blood PMN from healthy donors ( n = 4) were subjected to quantitative RT-PCR with primers for CCL18 and HPRT. CCL18 transcript levels are presented as relative expression ratios. Bars represent median expression between RNA samples.

above. Results in Figure 3a show an upregulation of CXCR4, CCRL2 and CCR5 in SF PMN from patients with RA in comparison with blood PMN from healthy donors. For many other receptors,  particularly  the  neutrophil  receptors  CXCR1  and CXCR2, mRNA levels were downregulated. When RNA from SF  PMN  obtained  from  RA  patient  nos  1,  2,  7  and  8  and healthy donor no. 2 was used, semiquantitative RT-PCR (Figure 3b) revealed an upregulation of two selected chemokine receptors, CCRL2 and CXCR4, in SF PMN, thereby confirming the results of the microarray analysis. These data therefore indicate that chemokine responsiveness of SF PMN is regulated,  at  least  in  part,  through  the  differential  regulation  of chemokine receptor expression.

## Induction of CCL18 protein synthesis in SF PMN

To determine whether SF PMN might contribute to CCL18 protein levels in inflamed joints, supernatants of cultured SF PMN from patients with RA were subjected to ELISA analysis. The  results  (Figure  4a)  showed  no  spontaneous  release  of CCL18 by SF PMN. However, CCL18 could be induced by stimulation of SF PMN with IL-10; indeed, IL-10 in combination with vitamin D 3 even enhanced CCL18 release. In contrast, SF PMN from patients with RA did not release CCL18 in response to TNFα . In addition, the effect of IL-10 in combination with TNFα was not significantly different from that of IL10  alone,  suggesting  that  TNFα may  not  be  involved  in CCL18 protein synthesis. Because IL-10 is frequently found in SF from patients with RA [31], PMN recruited into joints are likely to contribute to the local production of CCL18. Furthermore, because SF PMN from patients with RA were shown to express CCL18 mRNA in the absence of detectable CCL18 protein, it is evident from these data that the synthesis of CCL18 protein requires a secondary signal.

## TNFα induces CCL18 mRNA in the absence of CCL18 protein in blood PMN

To identify regulatory mechanisms involved in CCL18 expression, a putative role of TNFα as a sensitizing agent was investigated  in  cultures  of  blood  PMN  from  healthy  donors.  The results  shown  in  Figure  4b  confirmed  TNFα as  a  potent inducer of CCL18 mRNA expression. However, ELISA analysis of CCL18 levels in supernatants of the same cell cultures revealed no detectable CCL18 protein after 24 or 48 hours of incubation  (data  not  shown),  indicating  that  TNFα induced CCL18 mRNA expression in the absence of protein synthesis. Interestingly, as shown in Figure 4a, neither blood PMN from healthy donors nor blood PMN from patients with RA released significant amounts of CCL18 in response to IL-10 alone or to a  combination  of  IL-10  and  TNFα ,  suggesting  that  TNFα alone may not be sufficient to prime PMN for CCL18 synthesis. This conclusion is supported by data showing that CCL18 production could be induced by stimulating PMN with IL-10 and vitamin D 3 in  the  absence  of  exogenous  TNFα (Figure 4a). To investigate whether the difference between SF PMN and blood PMN in their responsiveness to IL-10 was due to soluble factors present in SF, blood PMN from healthy donors were pretreated  with  SF  from  patients  with  RA  and  subsequently stimulated with IL-10 alone or in combination with vitamin D 3 . The results in Figure 4c show that preincubation with SF supported induction by IL-10 alone. Incubation with both IL-10  and  vitamin  D 3 produced  the  release  of  even  more CCL18 by PMN preincubated with SF.

## Endothelial cells induce CCL18 protein in PMN

To determine whether extravasation might have a role in the induction  of  CCL18  release,  PMN  and  PBMC  from  healthy donors  were  co-cultured  with  the  endothelial  cell  line  EAhy.926. Results in Figure 5a revealed high levels of CCL18 in culture  supernatants  of  PMN  or  PBMC  co-cultured  with

<!-- image -->

Microarray analysis of chemokine receptor gene expression in synovial fluid polymorphonuclear neutrophils. (a) RNA of synovial fluid polymorphonuclear neutrophils (SF PMN) from nine patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) was analyzed for chemokine receptor expression. Data obtained by Gene Pix™ Analysis Software were normalized, transformed and denoted as  -fold regulation versus expression of blood PMN from healthy donors. x Bars represent median expression between nine RNA samples. Genes with median expression ratios less than -1 or more than +1 were significantly regulated. (b) Total RNA from SF PMN from RA patients nos 1, 2, 7 and 8 and from blood PMN from healthy donor no. 2 was amplified by semiquantitative RT-PCR with primers for CCRL2, CXCR4 and actin and subjected to agarose gel electrophoresis. PCR was repeated twice.

<!-- image -->

endothelial cells, whereas no release of CCL18 was observed when PMN and EA-hy.926 cells were incubated separately from each other in Boyden chambers. Similar levels of CCL18 were released into supernatant of RA blood or SF PMN co-cultured with endothelial cells (data not shown). The data therefore indicate that cell-cell contact is crucial for the induction of CCL18. Release of CCL18 was induced by endogenous TNFα , as revealed by blocking experiments with excess antiTNFα antibodies (Figure 5b). In controls, stimulation of EAhy.926  cells  with  TNFα was  found  to  induce  neither  the release of CCL18 (Figure 5b) nor the expression of CCL18 mRNA (Figure 5c), suggesting that CCL18 derives from PMN. To determine the origin of TNFα in co-cultures, either PMN or EA-hy.926  cells  were  pretreated  with γ -radiation  and  then incubated with the viable cellular counterpart. As shown in Figure 5d, irradiation of PMN on their own abolished the production of TNFα in co-culture with EA-hy.926 cells, indicating that PMN are the predominant source of TNFα in co-cultures. The

results  therefore  suggest  that  cell  contact  with  endothelial cells induces TNFα in  PMN,  which in turn induces CCL18 production by PMN in an autocrine manner.

## Discussion

This  study  describes  PMN,  and  particularly  SF  PMN  from patients with RA, as a novel cellular source of the chemokine CCL18. As judged by the immunostaining of SF PMN with anti-CD66b, nongranulocytic cells constituted less than 1% of the PMN preparations. Flow cytometry confirmed the low frequency (0.05%) of CD14-positive monoctyes/macrophages in  isolated  PMN populations, suggesting that contaminating cells are unlikely to have a significant role in the chemokine profile determined by microarray analysis. In addition, data are presented to show that the production of CCL18 by PMN is differentially regulated at the levels of mRNA expression and protein synthesis. CCL18 was originally described to be constitutively expressed in lung and lymphoid tissue [32]. At the

## Figure 4

Induction of CCL18 mRNA and protein in synovial fluid and blood polymorphonuclear neutrophils. (a) Synovial fluid polymorphonuclear neutrophils (SF PMN) of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and blood PMN from healthy donors and patients with RA were incubated with 20 ng/ml IL-10, 10 -7  M vitamin D 3 and 10 ng/ml TNFα for 48 hours. Levels of CCL18 in the supernatant were determined by ELISA. Data represent the geometric mean ± SEM for three independent experiments performed in duplicate. (b) PMN from healthy donors were incubated for 24 hours with various amounts of recombinant TNFα . Total RNA was amplified by semiquantitative RT-PCR with primers for CCL18 and actin and subjected to agarose gel electrophoresis. This result is representative of three independent experiments with PMN from three different donors. (c) Blood PMN from healthy donors were incubated in the presence or absence of SF from patients with RA for 10 hours, then washed twice and incubated for a further 48 hours with 20 ng/ml IL-10 and 10 -7  M vitamin D . Data represent the geometric mean ± SEM for three independent experiments performed in 3 duplicate.

<!-- image -->

cellular level CCL18 production seems to be restricted to dendritric  cells  and  monocytes/macrophages  [18,19].  T  helper cell type 2-related cytokines, including IL-4, IL-10 and IL-13, were found to induce or enhance CCL18 expression, whereas the T helper type 1-derived interferon-  suppressed CCL18 γ mRNA expression [17]. There is also evidence for a superantigen-induced CCL18 production by PBMC [19].

It is shown here that CCL18 mRNA expression is induced in PMN  by  TNFα in  the  absence  of  detectable  amounts  of CCL18 protein, suggesting that TNFα provides an early signal for CCL18 transcription. Consistent with these cell culture observations, steady-state levels of CCL18 mRNA were readily found in SF PMN from patients with RA in the absence of

detectable  cell-associated  CCL18.  Its  synthesis,  however, was inducible on incubation of SF PMN with IL-10. Previous studies showed that TNFα is able to prime PMN for subsequent downstream events [33]. Hence it is reasonable to conclude that CCL18 production by PMN requires two independent signals, one for mRNA expression, provided by TNFα , and the other for protein synthesis, mediated by IL-10; these two cytokines are readily available in SF [31]. In DC cultures,  differential  regulation  of  CCL18  mRNA  and  protein expression  has  been  attributed  to  changes  in  maturation [34,35].  It is unclear  whether  additional  maturation  also accounts  for  the  differential  regulation  of  CCL18  in  PMN, because this cell type is considered to be terminally differentiated. However, Iking-Konert and colleagues [36] suggested

## Figure 5

CCL18 induction of polymorphonuclear neutrophils co-cultured with endothelial cells requires cell-cell contact and TNFα . (a) CCL18 levels were measured by ELISA in culture supernatants of 5 × 10 5  peripheral blood mononuclear cells, 5 × 10 6  polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) or 5 × 10 5  EA-hy.926 cells alone or after co-culture with EA-hy.926 cells after incubation for 48 hours. Direct cell-cell contact of PMN and EA-hy.926 cells was prevented by Boyden chambers (bc) as indicated. Data represent the geometric mean ± SEM of CCL18 measured in four independent experiments performed in duplicate. (b) CCL18 levels were measured in culture supernatants of PMN and EA-hy.926 cells alone or after co-culture of both cell types after incubation for 48 hours. Cultures were supplemented with anti-TNFα antibodies (infliximab; 50 μ g/ml) or 10 ng/ml TNFα as indicated. Data represent the geometric mean ± SEM of three independent experiments performed in duplicate. (c) RNA was prepared from PMN and EA-hy.926 cells alone or after co-culture of both cell types after incubation for 24 hours. Cultures were supplemented with TNFα (10 ng/ml) as indicated. RNA samples were amplified by semiquantitative RT-PCR with primers for CCL18 and actin and subjected to gel electrophoresis. This result is representative of three independent experiments with PMN from three different donors. (d) TNFα levels were measured by ELISA in culture supernatants of PMN and EA-hy.926 cells alone and in co-cultures of PMN and EA-hy.926 cells before or after  -irradiation (40 Gy) of one of these γ cell types. The irradiated cell type is marked with an asterisk. Data represent the geometric mean ± SEM for three independent experiments performed in duplicate.

<!-- image -->

that SF PMN can further differentiate into a dendritic-like phenotype. Another speculative explanation for the regulation of CCL18 synthesis in PMN might involve microRNAs [37].

Because  TNFα -dependent  production  of  CCL18  by  PMN was inducible by means of cell-cell contact with endothelial cells, IL-10 may not be the only inducer for CCL18 synthesis. It has previously been shown that recognition of β 2-integrin/ ICAM-1 on fibroblast-like synoviocytes induced MIP-1 α

expression in SF PMN [38]. Whether a similar ICAM-1-related mechanism accounts for the endothelial cell-mediated induction of CCL18 in PMN is unknown.

IL-10 alone was unable to induce CCL18 in blood PMN, and its release was not enhanced by stimulating PMN with IL-10 in combination  with  TNFα .  The  apparent  difference  in  IL-10 responsiveness  between  SF  PMN  and  blood  PMN  from patients with RA may result from different expression patterns

of the IL-10 receptors (IL-10R). It was shown that circulating PMN express high levels of the IL-10R2 and low levels of IL10R1 [39]. Increasing IL-10R1 by stimulation with lipopolysaccharide  coincided  with  an  increased  responsiveness  of PMN to IL-10. The increased responsiveness in SF PMN may be induced by soluble factors present in SF, because preincubation  of  blood  PMN  with  SF  supported  the  induction  of CCL18 by IL-10 alone. In this context, CCL18 production was synergistically enhanced when PMN were stimulated with IL10 in combination with vitamin D . These findings suggest that 3 the high CCL18 levels in SF from RA patients [19] may be induced  synergistically,  as  previously  shown  for  monocytes cultured with IL-10 and SF from patients with RA [35]. The unidentified stimulating activity in SF [35] may be attributed to vitamin D , because SF macrophages were shown to be able 3 to produce vitamin D 3 in cell culture experiments [40]. As IL10 and vitamin D 3 are known to have anti-inflammatory properties [41,42], the release of CCL18 induced by these mediators might contribute to a suppression of joint inflammation.

CCL18 has already been recognized in tissues and joints of patients  with  RA.  In  particular,  high  levels  of  CCL18  were measured  in  SF,  and  immunostaining  of  tissue  sections revealed CCL18 production in perivascular regions of the synovia in CD68-positive monocytes/macrophages [19]. Furthermore, CCL18  mRNA  and  protein  were  found  in  DCs, generated in vitro from monocytes of RA patients [43], implying  that  high  levels  of  CCL18  in  SF  originate  from  macrophages  as  well  as  DCs.  The  contribution  of  PMN  to  the accumulation of CCL18 in SF is difficult to judge because the cells have a low production rate for cellular mediators. However, because PMN are the majority of cells recruited into SF, the  large  number  of  PMN  may  compensate  for  their  low production rate at the cellular level [44]. PMN may therefore be  considered  a  cellular  source  of  CCL18,  contributing  at least partly to the levels of CCL18 found in diseased joints.

Microarray analysis was performed to compare CCL18 mRNA expression in SF PMN from patients with RA with expression levels of other chemokines. The results show a characteristic profile  of  highly  regulated  chemokine  mRNAs  that  form  a group of four upregulated chemokines, namely CCL18, CCL3, CXCL8  and  CXCL10,  and  one  downregulated  chemokine, namely CCL21. It is therefore unlikely that SF PMN favor the formation  of  ectopic  germinal  centers,  in  which  increased levels of CCL21 were detected [45]. In contrast with the transcriptional  program  of  terminal  granulocytic  differentiation [46], chemokines in SF PMN from patients with RA were not upregulated in parallel with their receptors. With the exception of  CXCR4,  CCRL2  and  CCR5  mRNAs,  most  chemokine receptors  were  downregulated  in  SF  PMN,  supporting  the notion of a differential modulation of chemokine receptors and their ligands during chronic inflammation. These findings suggest that SF PMN from patients with RA develop into a stage of unresponsiveness through the downregulation of chemok-

ine receptors. Possible mechanisms accounting for the suppression  of  chemokine  responsiveness  may  include  ligandinduced receptor internalization and TNFα -mediated proteolytic degradation of chemokine receptors [47]. However, it is also  possible  that  some  of  the  SF  PMN  with  low  levels  of CXCR1,  for  example,  develop  into  the  recently  described long-lived  PMN  with  the  capability  of  migrating  across  the endothelium in a retrograde direction [48]. In contrast, large numbers of CCR5 molecules on PMN have been attributed to a sequestration of chemokines, which may help to resolve the local inflammation [49]. Upregulation of CCR5 mRNA in SF PMN  may  therefore  contribute  to  a  regulation  of  the  local chemokine response in diseased joints. The role of CCRL2 on SF PMN remains obscure, because no ligand has yet been identified [50].

Microarray analysis of blood PMN from patients with X-linked chronic granulomatous disease revealed increased mRNA levels for only two chemokines, namely CXCL8 and CXCL1 [51]. When compared with the chemokine expression profile in SF PMN from patients with RA, the data indicate a disease-specific expression of chemokines in PMN. This conclusion is supported,  at  least  in  part,  by  the  results  of  Sukumaran  and colleagues [52], who reported the upregulated expression of chemokine genes encoding CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, CXCL8, CCL3, CCL4 and CCL20 after infection of PMN with Anaplasma phagocytophilum . However, no mRNA expression was observed for CCL18 and CXCL10 in PMN infected with A. phagocytophilum .

## Conclusion

This is the first study showing that SF PMN from patients with RA  is  a  cellular  source  of  CCL18.  Its  production  by  PMN seems to be tightly regulated at the levels of mRNA expression and protein synthesis. SF PMN from patients with RA exhibit a characteristic  chemokine  expression  pattern  resembling  the upregulation of CCL3, CCL18, CXCL8 and CXCL10 mRNAs and  the  downregulation  of  CCL21  mRNA.  Blockade  of CCL18 expression by anti-TNFα antibodies identifies CCL18 as an additional target for anti-TNFα therapy in patients with RA.

## Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## Authors' contributions

JA performed research and supported the paperwork including  figures  and  text.  MB  performed  the  microarray  analysis. HS-K and TN, as physicians at the local hospital, prepared the samples from patients with RA. SR supervised the microarray analysis. MR and JRK provided advice on experimental design. HUB supervised the experimental work and wrote the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Acknowledgements

We thank Eva Möller for the statistical analysis of microarray data, Hanns-Martin Lorenz for providing monoclonal anti-TNFα antibody (infliximab), and Jasmin Baumgartl and Claudia Feulner for expert technical assistance. The work was supported by the Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research (IZKF) at the University Hospital of the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg (grant number A17) and the Doktor-RobertPfleger-Stiftung, Bamberg.

## References

- 1. Witko-Sarsat  V,  Rieu  P,  Descamps-Latscha  B,  Lesavre  P,  Halbwachs-Mecarelli  L: Neutrophils:  molecules,  functions  and pathophysiological aspects. Lab Invest 2000, 80: 617-653.
- 2. Kobayashi SD, Voyich JM, Burlak C, DeLeo FR: Neutrophils in the innate  immune  response. Arch  Immunol  Ther  Exp  (Warsz) 2005, 53: 505-517.
- 3. Pillinger  MH,  Abramson  SB: The  neutrophil  in  rheumatoid arthritis. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 1995, 21: 691-714.
- 4. Arnott  ID,  Drummond  HE,  Ghosh  S: Gut  luminal  neutrophil migration  is  influenced  by  the  anatomical  site  of  Crohn's disease. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2001, 13: 239-243.
- 5. Hachicha M, Naccache PH, McColl SR: Inflammatory microcrystals differentially regulate the secretion of macrophage inflammatory protein 1 and interleukin 8 by human neutrophils: a possible  mechanism  of  neutrophil  recruitment  to  sites  of inflammation in synovitis. J Exp Med 1995, 182: 2019-2025.
- 6. Norberg  B,  Bjelle  A,  Eriksson  S: Joint  fluid  leukocytosis  of patients with rheumatoid arthritis evidence for neutrophil and monocyte chemotaxis in vivo . Clin Rheumatol 1983, 2: 237-242.
- 7. Chatham WW, Swaim R, Frohsin H Jr, Heck LW, Miller EJ, Blackburn WD Jr: Degradation of human articular cartilage by neutrophils in synovial fluid. Arthritis Rheum 1993, 36: 51-58.
- 8. Mohr W, Westerhellweg H, Wessinghage D: Polymorphonuclear granulocytes in rheumatic tissue destruction. III. an electron microscopic study of PMNs at the pannus-cartilage junction in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 1981, 40: 396-399.
- 9. Kasama T, Kobayashi K, Yajima N, Shiozawa F, Yoda Y, Takeuchi HT, Mori Y, Negishi M, Ide H, Adachi M: Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor by synovial fluid neutrophils in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Clin Exp Immunol 2000, 121: 533-538.
- 10. Scapini P, Lapinet-Vera JA, Gasperini S, Calzetti F, Bazzoni F, Cassatella MA: The neutrophil as a cellular source of chemokines. Immunol Rev 2000, 177: 195-203.
- 11. Fernandez  EJ,  Lolis  E: Structure,  function,  and  inhibition  of chemokines. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2002, 42: 469-499.
- 12. Brueckmann M, Nahrup AS, Lang S, Bertsch T, Fukudome K, Liebe V, Kaden JJ, Hoffmann U, Borggrefe M, Huhle G: Recombinant human activated protein C upregulates the release of soluble fractalkine from human endothelial cells. Br J Haematol 2006, 133: 550-557.
- 13. Issa  R,  Xie  S,  Lee  KY,  Stanbridge  RD,  Bhavsar  P,  Sukkar  MB, Chung KF: GRO-  regulation in airway smooth muscle by IL-1 α β and TNFα : role of NFκ B and MAP kinases. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2006, 291: L66-L74.
- 14. Rossi  D,  Zlotnik  A: The  biology  of  chemokines  and  their receptors. Annu Rev Immunol 2000, 18: 217-242.
- 15. Murdoch  C,  Finn  A: Chemokine  receptors  and  their  role  in inflammation and infectious diseases. Blood 2000, 95: 3032-3043.
- 16. Bruhl H, Wagner K, Kellner H, Schattenkirchner M, Schlondorff D, Mack  M: Surface  expression  of  CC-  and  CXC-chemokine receptors on leucocyte subsets in inflammatory joint diseases. Clin Exp Immunol 2001, 126: 551-559.
- 17. Schutyser  E,  Richmond  A,  Van  Damme  J: Involvement  of  CC chemokine  ligand  18  (CCL18)  in  normal  and  pathological processes. J Leukoc Biol 2005, 78: 14-26.
- 18. Vulcano  M,  Struyf  S,  Scapini  P,  Cassatella  M,  Bernasconi  S, Bonecchi R, Calleri A, Penna G, Adorini L, Luini W, et al. : Unique regulation of CCL18 production by maturing dendritic cells. J Immunol 2003, 170: 3843-3849.
- 19. Schutyser E, Struyf S, Wuyts A, Put W, Geboes K, Grillet B, Opdenakker G, Van Damme J: Selective induction of CCL18/PARC by staphylococcal enterotoxins in mononuclear cells and

enhanced  levels  in  septic  and  rheumatoid  arthritis. Eur  J

- Immunol 2001, 31: 3755-3762. 20. Radstake TR, van der Voort R, ten Brummelhuis M, de Waal Malefijt M, Looman M, Figdor CG, van den Berg WB, Barrera P, Adema GJ: Increased  expression  of  CCL18,  CCL19,  and  CCL17  by dendritic cells from patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and regulation by Fc  receptors. γ Ann Rheum Dis 2005, 64: 359-367. 21. Giudicelli J, Philip PJ, Delque P, Sudaka P: A single-step centrifugation method for separation of granulocytes and mononuclear cells from blood using discontinuous density gradient of Percoll. J Immunol Methods 1982, 54: 43-46. 22. Chomczynski P, Sacchi N: Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. Anal Biochem 1987, 162: 156-159. 23. ArrayExpress home [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress] 24. Storey JD, Tibshirani R: Statistical significance for genomewide studies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100: 9440-9445. 25. Huber W, von Heydebreck A, Sueltmann H, Poustka A, Vingron M: Parameter estimation for the calibration and variance stabilization  of  microarray  data. Stat  Appl  Genet  Mol  Biol 2003, 2: Article3. 26. Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) [http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov] 27. Jinquan T, Quan S, Jacobi HH, Madsen HO, Glue C, Skov PS, Malling HJ, Poulsen LK: CXC chemokine receptor 4 expression and  stromal  cell-derived  factor-1 α -induced  chemotaxis  in CD4+  T  lymphocytes  are  regulated  by  interleukin-4  and interleukin-10. Immunology 2000, 99: 402-410. 28. Croitoru-Lamoury J, Guillemin GJ, Boussin FD, Mognetti B, Gigout LI, Cheret A, Vaslin B, Le Grand R, Brew BJ, Dormont D: Expression of chemokines and their receptors in human and simian astrocytes:  evidence  for  a  central  role  of  TNF α and  IFN γ in CXCR4 and CCR5 modulation. Glia 2003, 41: 354-370. 29. Harris SG, Smith RS, Phipps RP: 15-deoxyΔ 12,14-PGJ2 induces IL-8 production in human T cells by a mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. J Immunol 2002, 168: 1372-1379. 30. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD: Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2 ΔΔ Ct method. Methods 2001, 25: 402-408. 31. Lettesjo  H,  Nordstrom  E,  Strom  H,  Nilsson  B,  Glinghammar  B, Dahlstedt L, Moller E: Synovial fluid cytokines in patients with rheumatoid arthritis or other arthritic lesions. Scand J Immunol 1998, 48: 286-292. 32. Hieshima K, Imai T, Baba M, Shoudai K, Ishizuka K, Nakagawa T, Tsuruta J, Takeya M, Sakaki Y, Takatsuki K, et al. : A novel human CC  chemokine  PARC  that  is  most  homologous  to  macrophage-inflammatory protein-1 α /LD78 α and chemotactic for T lymphocytes,  but  not  for monocytes. J Immunol 1997, 159: 1140-1149. 33. Grutkoski PS, D'Amico R, Ayala A, Simms HH: Tumor necrosis factorα -stimulated polymorphonuclear leukocytes suppress migration and bactericidal activity of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in a paracrine manner. Crit Care Med 2002, 30: 591-597. 34. van Lieshout AW, Barrera P, Smeets RL, Pesman GJ, van Riel PL, van den Berg WB, Radstake TR: Inhibition of TNF α during maturation of dendritic cells results in the development of semimature cells: a potential mechanism for the beneficial effects of  TNF α blockade  in  rheumatoid  arthritis. Ann  Rheum  Dis 2005, 64: 408-414. 35. van  Lieshout  AW,  van  der  Voort  R,  le  Blanc  LM,  Roelofs  MF, Schreurs  BW,  van  Riel  PL,  Adema  GJ,  Radstake  TR: Novel insights in the regulation of CCL18 secretion by monocytes and dendritic cells via cytokines, Toll-like receptors and rheumatoid synovial fluid. BMC Immunol 2006, 7: 23. 36. Iking-Konert  C,  Ostendorf  B,  Sander  O,  Jost  M,  Wagner  C, Joosten L, Schneider M, Hänsch GM: Transdifferentiation of polymorphonuclear neutrophils to dendritic-like cells at the site of inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis: evidence for activation by T cells. Ann Rheum Dis 2005, 64: 1436-1442. 37. Rodriguez A, Vigorito E, Clare S, Warren MV, Couttet P, Soond DR, van Dongen S, Grocock RJ, Das PP, Miska EA, et al. : Requirement of bic/microRNA-155 for normal immune function. Science 2007, 316: 608-611. 38. Hanyuda M, Kasama T, Isozaki T, Matsunawa MM, Yajima N, Miyaoka  H,  Uchida  H,  Kameoka  Y,  Ide  H,  Adachi  M: Activated

leucocytes  express  and  secrete  macrophage  inflammatory protein-1 α upon interaction with synovial fibroblasts of rheumatoid arthritis via a β 2-integrin/ICAM-1 mechanism. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2003, 42: 1390-1397.

- 39. Crepaldi L, Gasperini S, Lapinet JA, Calzetti F, Pinardi C, Liu Y, Zurawski S, de Waal Malefyt R, Moore KW, Cassatella MA: Upregulation of IL-10R1 expression is required to render human neutrophils  fully responsive  to  IL-10. J Immunol 2001, 167: 2312-2322.
- 40. Hayes ME, Denton J, Freemont AJ, Mawer EB: Synthesis of the active metabolite of vitamin D, 1,25(OH) 2 D3 , by synovial fluid macrophages  in  arthritic  diseases. Ann  Rheum  Dis 1989, 48: 723-729.
- 41. Oelzner P, Muller A, Deschner F, Huller M, Abendroth K, Hein G, Stein G: Relationship between disease activity and serum levels of vitamin D metabolites and PTH in rheumatoid arthritis. Calcif Tissue Int 1998, 62: 193-198.
- 42. Asadullah K, Sterry W, Volk HD: Interleukin-10 therapy - review of a new approach. Pharmacol Rev 2003, 55: 241-269.
- 43. Radstake TR, van der Voort R, ten Brummelhuis M, de Waal Malefijt M, Looman M, Figdor CG, van den Berg WB, Barrera P, Adema GJ: Increased  expression  of  CCL18,  CCL19,  and  CCL17  by dendritic cells from patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and regulation by Fc  receptors. γ Ann Rheum Dis 2005, 64: 359-367.
- 44. Cassatella MA: Neutrophil-derived proteins: selling cytokines by the pound. Adv Immunol 1999, 73: 369-509.
- 45. Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ: Ectopic germinal center formation in rheumatoid synovitis. Ann NY Acad Sci 2003, 987: 140-149.
- 46. Theilgaard-Monch K, Jacobsen LC, Borup R, Rasmussen T, Bjerregaard MD, Nielsen FC, Cowland JB, Borregaard N: The transcriptional  program  of  terminal  granulocytic  differentiation. Blood 2005, 105: 1785-1796.
- 47. Khandaker MH, Mitchell G, Xu L, Andrews JD, Singh R, Leung H, Madrenas J, Ferguson SS, Feldman RD, Kelvin DJ: Metalloproteinases are involved in lipopolysaccharide- and tumor necrosis factorα -mediated regulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2 chemokine receptor expression. Blood 1999, 93: 2173-2185.
- 48. Buckley CD, Ross EA, McGettrick HM, Osborne CE, Haworth O, Schmutz C, Stone PC, Salmon M, Matharu NM, Vohra RK, et al. : Identification of a phenotypically and functionally distinct population of long-lived neutrophils  in a model  of  reverse endothelial migration. J Leukoc Biol 2006, 79: 303-311.
- 49. Ariel A, Fredman G, Sun YP, Kantarci A, Van Dyke TE, Luster AD, Serhan CN: Apoptotic neutrophils and T cells sequester chemokines during immune response resolution through modulation of CCR5 expression. Nat Immunol 2006, 7: 1209-1216.
- 50. Galligan CL, Matsuyama W, Matsukawa A, Mizuta H, Hodge DR, Howard OM, Yoshimura T: Up-regulated expression and activation of the orphan chemokine receptor, CCRL2, in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2004, 50: 1806-1814.
- 51. Kobayashi SD, Voyich JM, Braughton KR, Whitney AR, Nauseef WM, Malech HL, DeLeo FR: Gene expression profiling provides insight  into  the  pathophysiology  of  chronic  granulomatous disease. J Immunol 2004, 172: 636-643.
- 52. Sukumaran B, Carlyon JA, Cai JL, Berliner N, Fikrig E: Early transcriptional  response  of  human  neutrophils  to Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection. Infect Immun 2005, 73: 8089-8099.