<!-- image -->

## ast and Accurate Quantitative Analysis of Cytokine F Gene Expression in Human Neutrophils

Nicola   Tamassia  ,   Marco   A.   Cassatella  , and   Flavia   Bazzoni

## Abstract

Polymorphonuclear neutrophils, traditionally viewed as short-lived effector cells, are nowadays regarded as important components of effector and regulatory circuits in the innate and adaptive immune systems. Most of the physiological functions of neutrophils as crucial players in the host immune response, able not only to act in the early phases of acute infl  ammation but also to condition the progression of the infl  ammatory reaction and the subsequent initiation of the specifi  c immune response, rely on their capacity to produce and release a number of proinfl  ammatory and immunoregulatory cytokines. This fact has reevaluated the importance, role, and physiological and pathological signifi  cance of neutrophils in the pathogenesis of infl  ammatory, infectious, autoimmune, and neoplastic diseases and has identifi  ed neutrophils as an important potential target for selective pharmacological intervention to both promote and restrain infl  ammation. In this context, understanding the mechanisms of modulation of neutrophil-derived cytokines and chemokines represents a critical step toward a better understanding of how neutrophils may infl  uence pathophysiological processes in vivo. Herein, we describe and discuss an updated version of the methods that we have developed to rapidly and precisely characterize the pattern of cytokine expression in in vitroactivated human neutrophils. The validation of the reverse transcription quantitative real-time PCR assay as a suitable strategy for an accurate, sensitive, reliable, and bona fi  de analysis of cytokine gene expression in human neutrophils overcomes several problems strictly specifi  c to neutrophils and offers an important tool, in the neutrophil research area, to test many experimental conditions for gene expression analysis.

Key words Neutrophils  ,   RT-qPCR  ,   Cytokines  ,   SYBR Green  ,   Gene expression

## 1 ntroduction I

Neutrophils constitute a fi  rst line of defense against pathogens by virtue  of  their  ability  to  release  a  set  of  preformed  cytotoxic enzymes and generate reactive oxygen-derived species. Neutrophils can  also  produce,  upon  appropriate  stimulation  in  vitro  and  in vivo, a variety of proteins, including cytokines, chemotactic molecules,  and  other  mediators  that  are  involved  in  various  effector functions [  1  ]. This latter function is currently the subject of a new wave of enthusiastic research, in that it shows that neutrophils may also act as key regulators of the in vivo cross talk between immune,

endothelial, stromal, and parenchymal cells. For a fairly exhaustive description of experimental conditions leading to the production of  individual  cytokines  by  neutrophils,  as  well  as  the  molecular regulation and potential biological relevance of this process, the reader is referred to recent reviews [  1  ].

There is an increasing interest in the identifi  cation and molecular characterization of protein/cytokine expression and production by neutrophils. In most studies aimed at characterizing neutrophilderived proteins, granulocytes are isolated from fresh blood or buffy coats, suspended in culture medium containing up to 10 % serum, and then cultured at 37 °C in a 5 % CO  humidifi  ed atmosphere. 2 Other investigators suspend neutrophils in serum-free medium or in buffered solutions containing various concentrations of serum or bovine serum albumin. Although this is appropriate for short-term incubations, it is not recommended for experiments requiring several hours in culture, such as the determination of neutrophil gene expression or protein release. In our studies, highly purifi  ed neutrophil populations are routinely suspended at no more than 10  cells/ 7 mL in medium containing 10 % low-  endotoxin fetal bovine serum (FBS). Under these conditions, granulocytes can be cultured in tissue culture plasticware for up to 44 h if appropriate neutrophil survival factor(s) is (are) added to the cultures.

Cytokine  synthesis  and/or  release  by  polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) can be measured in cell-free supernatants (or in cell pellets) by using different methods, such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), radioimmunoassay (RIA), mmunoprecipitation after metabolic labeling, bioassays, and also i intracellular staining followed by fl  ow cytometry and immunohistochemistry.  Because  the  induction  of  cytokine  production  and release by neutrophils are usually preceded by an increased accumulation of the related mRNA transcripts, a number of molecular biology techniques, such as Northern blotting, ribonuclease protection  assays  (RPA),  reverse-transcription  (RT)-PCR,  in  situ hybridization,  microarray  analysis,  and  RNA-Seq,  can  be  also performed.

Northern blots and RPA have the advantage of making differences in cytokine mRNA expression quantitatively measurable, but the very low RNA content of neutrophils (average 1 μ g/10  7 cells) represents a limiting factor in the analysis of gene expression modulation when many experimental conditions are tested. The development of reverse transcription quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) has revolutionized the measurement of gene expression, because it requires less RNA template than other methods of gene  expression  analysis  and  allows  a  reliable  quantifi  cation  of RT-PCR products. RT-qPCR assays are more sensitive than RPA [  2   and dot blot [  3  ] and can even detect a single copy of a specifi  c ] transcript [  4  ]. This feature represents a notable advantage, in that the expression of several (up to 10) cytokine/chemokine genes can

## 2 Materials

## 2.1 Miscellaneous

be analyzed in RT-qPCR starting from as little as 0.1 μ g of total RNA (Fig.   1  ). For its accuracy, RT-qPCR is also the method of choice for the validation of microarray [  5  ] (Fig.   1  ) or RNA-Seq [  6  ] results. On the other hand, because of its extremely high sensitivity,  RT-qPCR  can  easily  amplify  cytokine  mRNA  from  a  few (&lt;0.5 %) contaminating monocytes, lymphocytes, or eosinophils. This represents a major concern, because peripheral blood mononuclear  cells  (PBMCs)  possess  10-20  times  more  RNA  per  cell than neutrophils, so that a contamination of only 1 % PBMCs can translate into an up to 20 % of contamination at the RNA level. Recently a novel neutrophil purifi  cation procedure based on negative  immunoselection  with  magnetic  beads  (EasySep  neutrophil enrichment kit, StemCell Technologies), that allow to achieve very high level of purity (&gt;99.5 %), has been developed [  7  ]. The use of this procedure is therefore crucial to generate uncontroversial evidence that cytokine mRNA expression can be directly attributed to neutrophils,  excluding  the  potential  contribution  of  PBMCs  or even eosinophils. Based on reports from our group [  8  -  10  ] as well as  from  other  laboratories  [  11  ,    12  ],  the  absence  of  detectable IFN , β IL-10, or IL-6 mRNA  in  lipopolysaccharide (LPS)stimulated  neutrophils  represents  a  good  control  of  neutrophil purity (Fig.   2  ).  In  addition,  correct  methodological analysis and detailed investigation of the pattern of cytokine gene expression by neutrophils in vitro represent the required and important steps.

n this chapter, we describe validated methods currently used I in our laboratory for the optimal application of the RT-qPCR strategy in the analysis of human neutrophil cytokine gene expression. There  are  several  types  of  detection  chemistry  available  for  the quantitative  real-time  PCR  (qPCR)  assay  (DNA-binding  dyes, hybridization probes, hydrolysis probes, molecular beacons, scorpions, etc.). Among the two most commonly used (SYBR Green and  TaqMan  probes),  we  describe  here  the  SYBR  Green-based assay. SYBR Green is a fl  uorescent DNA intercalator dye that binds to double-stranded PCR products that accumulate during cycling. With  well-designed  primers,  SYBR  Green  produces  results  with the  sensitivity  and  range  of  quantifi  cation  comparable  to  those obtained with TaqMan, making this strategy very fl  exible and less expensive  as  compared  to  other  chemistries.  Finally,  and  most importantly,  the  data  obtained  by  this  RT-qPCR  strategy  have been validated by comparable results obtained with other methods for gene expression analysis (Fig.   1  ).

- .   Cell 1 culture  medium:  RPMI-1640  medium  supplemented with  10  %  low-endotoxin  FBS  (endotoxin  content  must  be lower than 5-10 pg/mL, certifi  ed by the company or verifi  ed by a Limulus Amebocyte Lysate [LAL] assay).

ig. 1 F Quantitative analysis of cytokine gene expression in activated neutrophils and monocytes performed in RT-qPCR (    ), ribonuclease protection assay (RPA) a ( b ,  and  microarray  (    ).  Neutrophils  and  autologous  monocytes  were  cultured ) c with 100 ng/mL ultrapure LPS. After 4 h, total RNA was extracted and analyzed for TNFα , CXCL8, IL-1ra, CXCL10, and IL-6 mRNA accumulation. (    ) 1 a μ g RNA/ condition was processed by RT-qPCR (described in this chapter). Expression levels of cytokine mRNAs are reported as mean normalized expression (MNE), calculated after GAPDH normalization ( see Note 15 . ( ) b 5 ) μ g of total RNA/sample were processed by RPA assay, using a custom kit (Pharmingen) and according to the manufacturer's protocol. Radioactive signals were quantifi  ed with InstantImager (Packard Instruments) and plotted after GAPDH normalization. (    ) c 10 μ g of total RNA/sample were processed and analyzed by NimbleGen oligonucleotide microarray (Roche) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Data are reported as mean relative microarray expression (   = 3) after quantile normalizan tion. Graphs demonstrate that these three techniques produce similar quantitative results

<!-- image -->

2.2 otal RNA T Purifi  cation

ig. 2 F he presence of few contaminating monocytes in LPS-treated neutrophils T can lead to a considerable IL-6 mRNA induction. Neutrophils (N), purifi  ed by negative immunomagnetic selection; monocytes (M), purifi  ed by CD14-positive immunomagnetic selection; or neutrophils to which were added increasing percentages of monocytes (ranging from 0.0001 to 10 %) were treated or not with 100 ng/mL ultrapure LPS for 2 h. Total RNA was then extracted, and levels of IL-6 transcript were  analyzed  by  RT-qPCR,  as  described  in  this  chapter.  Gene  expression  is depicted as MNE units, calculated after GAPDH normalization ( see Note 15 )

<!-- image -->

- 2. Agonists:  Ultrapure  LPS,  extracted  by  successive  enzymatic hydrolysis steps and purifi  ed by the phenol-TEA-DOC extraction (commercially available from different sources).
- 3. All plasticware utilized to work with RNA (pipet tips, polypropylene  tubes,  syringes,  20-G  needles)  must  be  RNase-free, autoclaved, and kept in a separate dedicated area. All disposable plastics utilized for RT and qPCR, including pipet tips or tubes, must be certifi  ed for the absence of DNA contamination,  RNase,  DNase, or other PCR inhibitors and kept in a dedicated area.
- 4. Whenever indicated, use sterile, pyrogen- and RNase-free H   O 2 approved for clinical use. One-milliliter aliquots are prepared and used for RNA, cDNA, and qPCR.
- 5. 70 % (v/v) ethanol: Dilute ethanol in RNase-free H   O, and 2 use it for RNA manipulation only.
- 1. RNeasy  mini  kit  (Qiagen):  Contains  RNeasy  mini  spin  columns, RLT buffer (lysis  buffer)  (supplement  with  143  mM β -mercaptoethanol immediately before use), RW1 buffer (fi  rst washing  buffer),  and  RPE  buffer  (second  washing  buffer) (dilute with 4 vol of 96-100 % ethanol immediately before use) ( see Note 1 . )

- 2. RNase-Free DNase Set (Qiagen): Contains RNase-free water; DNase I, which must be dissolved in 550 μ L of RNase-free water, aliquoted, and stored at -20 °C ( see Note 2 ; RDD buf-) fer for on-column DNA digestion (stored at 4 °C); and DNase I incubation mix, which must be prepared by adding 10 μ L of a DNase I stock solution to 70 μ L of RDD buffer ( see Note 1 . )

## 2.3 RNA Quantifi  cation

## 2.4 RNA Reverse Transcription

## 2.5 Quantitative Real-Time PCR

- 1. RiboGreen  RNA  Quantifi  cation Kit (Molecular Probes): Contains  RiboGreen  RNA  quantifi  cation  reagent  (store  at -20 °C protected from the light); 20× TE (200 mM Tris-HCl, 20  mM ethylenediamine  tetraacetic  acid  [EDTA],  pH  7.5), which must be stored at 4 °C and diluted to 1× with RNasefree  water  before  use;  ribosomal  RNA standard (2 μ g/mL), which must be stored at 4 °C or -20 °C for short- or longterm periods, respectively ( see Note 1 . )
- 2. Black, 96-well microplates optimized for fl  uorescence readings.
- 3. Fluorescence microplate reader equipped with approx 480-nm excitation and approx 520-nm emission fi  lters (e.g., VICTOR 3 Multilabel Counter, Perkin Elmer).
- 1. Reverse Transcriptase: Superscript™ III Reverse Transcriptase (200 U/ L), supplied with 5× First-Strand Buffer and 0.1 M μ dithiothreitol (DTT) (Life Technologies). Store all reagents at -20 °C.
- 2. Recombinant Ribonuclease Inhibitor: RNaseOUT™ Recombinant enzyme (acidic protein) from Life Technologies. Store at -20 °C.
- 3. Keep Superscript III and RNaseOUT in a refrigerated bench cooler (-20 °C) when performing reactions.
- 4. 10 mM dNTP mix: Aliquot and store at -20 °C.
- 5. Random primers: Dilute at 100 ng/ μ L with RNase-free H   O. 2 Aliquot and store at -20 °C.
- 1. Thermocycler  for  qPCR  :  The  protocol  described  here  is optimized for the ViiA™ 7 real-time PCR system, including the ViiA™ 7 software (Life Technologies) ( see Note 3 . )
- 2. SYBR  Green  qPCR  master  mix  (2×  concentrated  solution; e.g., Fast SYBR Green Master Mix [Life Technologies]): Store at -20 °C protected from light. Once thawed, store master mix at 4 °C. This solution contains all necessary reagents to perform a qPCR (i.e., appropriate buffer, dNTPs, SYBR Green I dye, ROX™ dye passive reference, and AmpliTaq   Fast DNA ® Polymerase), except primers ( see Note 4 . )
- 3. Forward and reverse primers: Dissolve in RNase-free H   O at a 2 fi  nal concentration of 100 μ M. Dilute primers at the working concentration of 20 μ M. Aliquot and store at -20 °C.

## 3 Methods

## 3.1 otal RNA T Purifi  cation

- 4.   96-  or  384-well  microplates  for  fast  qPCR  equipped  with optical  adhesive  fi  lm  suitable  for  a  thermocycler.  All  plastics must be stored in a clean place to avoid any possible contamination by external DNA.

The extraction of total RNA from neutrophils can be performed by different methods. However, depending on the method chosen, the quantity and/or the quality of the RNA extracted from neutrophils may greatly differ. It is essential for the RNA used in RT-qPCR not to be degraded, to contain as little contaminating salts as possible, and to be free of genomic DNA. For RT-qPCR, small quantities of total RNA are required (from 1 ng to 1 μ g), unlike other methodologies, including the Northern blotting or RPA, which need at least 5-10 μ g of RNA for each condition. Thus, the low yield of RNA usually purifi  ed from neutrophils does not represent a limiting factor for this technique.

RNA purifi  cation methods that rely on selective RNA binding properties of silica gel-based membranes are, in our opinion, the best because they are fast and reliable, allow rapid and simultaneous processing of many samples at once, and do not need a phenol/ chloroform extraction step. If one desires to obtain 1 μ g of total RNA per sample (which is the optimum RNA amount that can be used for RT-qPCR studies), the optimal starting cell number is 10 7 neutrophils/condition, given that 10  neutrophils contain approx 6 0.1 μ g of total RNA. 10  cells correspond to the maximum num7 ber of cells per sample that can be processed by an RNeasy mini kit ( see Note 5 .  We process and purify our samples exactly as described ) in the 'spin protocol for animal cells' reported in the RNeasy mini kit  instruction manual. The protocol is detailed, comprehensive, and  easy  to  follow,  so  that  no  detailed  explanation  needs  to  be given  herein.  The  volumes  used  to  resuspend  cells  in  the  initial steps of the procedures are specifi  ed as follows.

- 1. Resuspend purifi  ed neutrophils at 5  ×  10  cells/mL in RPMI 6 supplemented with 10 % low-endotoxin FBS ( see Note 6 . )
- 2. Plate 10  cells in a six-well tissue culture plate (2 mL/well), 7 stimulate as appropriate, and incubate at 37 °C in a 5 % CO 2 atmosphere for the desired time.
- 3. Collect  neutrophils  into  2-mL  tubes  and  pellet  at  300  × g for 5 min.
- 4. Carefully remove culture supernatants, and loosen cell pellets thoroughly by fl  icking the tube several times.
- 5. Resuspend  pellets  in  600 μ L  of  RLT  buffer  and  vortex ( see Note 7 . )

- 6. Homogenize lysates by passing them through a 20-G needle fi  tted  to  a  syringe  at  least  fi  ve  times  or  until  the  solution becomes less dense. At this stage, lysates can be further processed  or  stored  at  -70  °C  for  several  months  without  any change in RNA integrity ( see Note 8 . )
- 7. We do not perform the optional step 6 of the RNeasy mini kit protocol because we perform the on-column DNase digestion ( see Note 9 . Instead, the optional ) step 9 of the RNeasy mini kit protocol is performed. Otherwise, there are no further changes to the procedures described in the manual supplied with the kit.
- 8. Elute RNA from the column with 30 μ L of RNase-free water. The expected RNA yield is approx 0.1 μ g per 10  neutrophils. 6
- 9. RNA can be quickly concentrated up to 12 μ L using vacuum concentrator  system.  From  this  step  onward,  RNA  must  be kept on ice or stored at -20 to -70 °C.

RNA quantifi  cation is a crucial step for optimal RT-qPCR results, and we recommend performing the RT reaction with equivalent amounts of RNA from each sample. This limits differences in RT effi  ciency among the samples and favors subsequent normalization of  RT-qPCR  results.  If  extracting  RNA  from  less  than  3  ×  10 6 human  neutrophils  we  do  not  recommend  absorbance-based quantifi  cation because is not precise for detecting low target concentrations  even  with  new-generation  spectrophotometers  like nanodrop (Thermo Scientifi  c). The use of more sensitive methods, such as staining of nucleic acid with fl  uorescent dyes, overcomes this problem. We routinely use the RiboGreen RNA quantifi  cation reagent that consists of an ultrasensitive fl  uorescent  nucleic  acid stain. This reagent detects as little as 1 ng/mL of RNA in solution. The following method is adapted from the instructions included in the RiboGreen RNA quantifi  cation kit ( see Note 1 . )

- 1. Prepare a standard curve by diluting the standard RNA solution (provided with the kit and usually corresponding to 2 μ g/mL) with TE.
- 2. Prepare 1,000, 500, 50, and 20 ng/mL standards and blanks in  duplicate.  Pipet  100 μ L  of  the  prepared  dilutions  into 96-well black microtiter plates.
- 3. Dilute RNA samples directly into the microtiter plates by adding 1 μ L of RNA sample to 99 μ L of TE. Make one or more replicates.
- 4. Dilute (200-fold) the RiboGreen reagent with TE, and add 100 μ L of the diluted RiboGreen reagent to each well.
- 5. Gently shake the plate, and incubate it in the dark for 5 min.
- 6. Measure  the  fl  uorescence  in  each  well  with  a  fl  uorescence microtiter plate reader (excitation ~480 nm, emission ~520 nm) ( see Note 10 . )

3.2 RNA Quantifi  cation

## 3.3 RNA Reverse Transcription

3.4 Quantitative Real-Time PCR

- 7. Subtract the blank signal from the fl  uorescence value of each sample, and generate a standard curve of fl  uorescence vs. RNA concentration.
- 8. Determine the RNA concentration of the various samples by linear regression using the standard curve as reference.

RT  is  carried  out  with  SuperScript  III  Reverse  Transcriptase ollowing  the  protocol  included  in  the  manual  for  this  enzyme f ( see Notes 1 and 11 . )

- 1. For  each  sample,  prepare  the  following  RNA/primer  mix directly in a 0.2-mL tube (keep samples on ice) ( see Note 12 : ) from 1 to 0.1 μ g of total RNA, 1 μ L of random primers from 100 ng/ L stock, and 1 μ μ L of dNTP mix from 10 mM stock. Make up to 14 μ L fi  nal volume with RNase-free H   O. 2
- 2. Prepare  identical  samples  for  controls  that  will  not  receive reverse transcriptase (-RT) ( see Note 13 . )
- 3. Centrifuge the tubes briefl  y (quick-spin).
- 4. For  optimal  RNA/random  primer  denaturation,  incubate samples at 65 °C for 5 min in a preset thermocycler.
- 5. Prepare RT reaction master mix. For each reaction add 4 μ L of 5× fi  rst-strand buffer, 1 μ L of DTT from 0.1 M stock, 0.5 μ L RNaseOUT from 40 U/ L stock, and 0.5 μ μ L of SuperScript III  from  200  U/ μ L stock.  Prepare  a  volume  of  master  mix greater than what is necessary. For the -RT controls, prepare the  RT  reaction  master  mix  in  the  same  manner,  but  omit SuperScript III.
- 6. At the end of the denaturation step, pause the thermocycler, put tubes on ice for at least 1 min and add 6 μ L of RT reaction master  mix  to  each  tube.  Mix  by  pipetting,  and,  if  bubbles form, perform a quick-spin with the tubes.
- 7. For RNA/random primer annealing incubate tubes at 25 °C for 5 min and then at 42 °C for 1 h for RT. Subsequently heatinactivate the reactions at 95 °C for 5 min.
- 8. At  this  stage,  samples  are  single-strand  cDNA  and  can  be stored at -20 °C or immediately used as template for amplifi  cation in PCR.

The following qPCR procedure is adjusted for use of Fast SYBR Green  Master  Mix  as  qPCR  master  mix  in  combination  with  a ViiA™  7  thermocycler  ( see Notes  3 and      ).  The  use  of  qPCR 4 instruments and reagents enabled for fast PCR protocol allows a signifi  cant overall reduction of the reaction time from the typical 90-120 min to less than 40 min. For normalization strategy, in addition to the target genes, we always quantify also endogenous reference  genes.  Thermocycling  conditions  are  constant  for  all assays.

- .   Edit the following program in the real-time thermocyler: 1
- a) ( Step 1: 95 °C for 20 s (initial denaturation) ( see Note 4 . )
- b)    Step  2:  95  °C  for  1  s  (denaturation);  60  °C  for  20  s ( (annealing/extension);  fl  uorescence  read.  Repeat  for  45 cycles. An extension step is not required, because all of the PCR products are 50-250 bp.
- c) ( Step 3: Melting curve, set the fi  nal sample heating from 60 to 90 °C and have the fl  uorescence reading recorded every 0.5 °C ( see Note 14 . )
- 2. Prepare qPCR master mixes based upon the number of genes to be analyzed. Each sample must be tested in triplicate, and negative controls must be included. For every experiment the analysis of the expression of at least two reference genes must be always performed for accurate normalization ( see Note 15 . )
- 3. For a 10 μ L reaction, use the following components for each well or tube ( see Note 16 : 5 ) μ L of 2× Fast SYBR Green Master Mix, 0.1 μ L of forward primer from 20 μ M stock, 0.1 μ L of reverse primer from 20 μ M stock, 1.8 μ L of autoclaved H   O 2 (7 μ L fi  nal volume).
- 4. Dilute all cDNA samples to be analyzed to a concentration of 1 ng/ μ L ( see Notes 17 and 18 . )
- 5. Aliquot sequentially 7 μ L of qPCR master mix and 3 μ L of sample or H   O (for the 'no-template' control) or -RT (for 2 the negative control) into each well or tube. This step must be carried out very rapidly, as SYBR Green is light sensitive.
- 6. Carefully close the wells, with optical adhesive fi  lm, using the appropriate  sealer,  paying  great  attention  not  to  touch  or scratch the upper part of the fi  lm.
- 7. Briefl  y  centrifuge  the  plate  or  the  tubes,  and  then  start  the reaction in the real-time thermocycler.
- 8. Optional: Remove the plate or the tubes from the thermocycler after the qPCR is fi  nished. Separate 5 μ L of each sample by electrophoresis on a 2 % agarose gel to check for quality of PCR products.  If  the  reaction  proceeded  correctly,  a  single amplifi  ed product of the expected length should be visible in the gel.
- 9. At the end of the reaction, check the melting curve analysis to verify  whether  abnormal  amplifi  cation  plots  or  any  bimodal dissociation curves are present ( see Note 14 and Fig.   3a  ).
- 10.   At the end of the run, the ViiA 7 system software returns raw data [fl  uorescence value ( Δ Rn: normalized reporter value) of each  sample  for  each  real-time  PCR  cycle]  that  must  be analyzed.

3.5 Analysis of Real-Time PCR Data

ig. 3 F Melting and PCR amplifi  cation curves as shown by the ViiA 7 system software. (    ) The melting curve is plotted as fl  uorescence intensity ( a dot line or as ) first derivative (-d   /d    ) ( I T solid line of the PCR product as function of temperature. ) The melting temperature (    m) of the PCR product is defi  ned as the temperature T at which -d   /d   reach the maximum value. (    ) PCR amplifi  cation curve. The fl  uoI T b rescence intensity ( Δ Rn) is plotted as a function of cycle number. The baseline, threshold, and threshold cycle are indicated (reproduced from Tamassia et al. [  19  ] with permission from Humana Press  )

<!-- image -->

ViiA7  software  calculates  the  RT-qPCR  results  using  the ΔΔ Ct method [  13  ].  This  method  does  not  correct  RT-qPCR data for amplifi  cation effi  ciency of the reaction that is an important consideration when performing relative quantifi  cation. To overcome this problem, we calculate by LinRegPCR software [  14  ] the average amplifi  cation effi  ciency for each gene analyzed (including reference genes)  from  each  single  sample.  Subsequently  we  calculate  the RT-qPCR results using the Q-Gene software application [  15  ] that will give back the expression level of the gene of interest relative to an endogenous reference gene mRNA. A detailed description is referred in each software manual or original article [  14  ,   15  ].

- 1. Set the baseline on the analysis settings of ViiA 7 system software. The initial cycles of PCR where there is little fl  uorescence signal are termed 'baseline' and should be eliminated (Fig.   3b  ). The baseline should be wide enough to eliminate background but should not overlap with the area in which the amplifi  cation signal begins to rise above background ( see Note 19 . )

- 2.   Set  the  threshold  on  the  analysis  settings  of  ViiA  7  system software. The threshold is an arbitrary fl  uorescence value that must intercept the PCR amplifi  cation curve in the exponential phase of the reaction ( see Note 20 and Fig.   3b  ).
- 3. From the ViiA 7 system software export amplifi  cation data and results data of the qPCR run.
- 4. Calculate the effi  ciency of qPCR reaction for each gene assayed using amplifi  cation data. There are several methods of calculating amplifi  cation effi  ciency on raw data collected during PCR. We  routinely calculate the amplifi  cation effi  ciency with LinRegPCR software [  14  ]. The program uses linear regression analysis to fi  nd the best-fi  t straight line through the PCR data set. From this line, PCR effi  ciency of each individual sample is calculated. The amplifi  cation effi  ciency value that we take for each  gene  is  the  average  of  the  single  effi  ciencies  calculated with LinRegPCR ( see Note 21 . )
- 5.   From the results data export threshold cycle (Ct) values to the Q-Gene Excel datasheet. The cycle at which the fl  uorescence signal from the reaction crosses the threshold line is defi  ned as the Ct. Once the threshold line is set, the real-time software automatically generates a Ct value for each sample. The Ct is a reliable indicator of the initial copy number of each amplifi  ed cDNA.
- .   Perform 6 the final quantifi  cation with Q-Gene software ( see Note 22 . Insert the following values in the Q-Gene Excel ) datasheet: (1) the Ct s generated for each sample, both for the target gene and for the reference gene by the real-time thermocycler software; (2) the calculated amplifi  cation effi  ciency for the gene of interest and for the reference gene; and (3) the calculation procedure 2, corresponding to equation 3 described by Muller and coauthors [  15  ].
- 7. The Q-Gene software calculates the mean normalized expression (MNE) with standard errors for each sample, corrected for amplifi  cation effi  ciencies. Examples of the results that can be obtained are shown in Figs.   1 and   2  .

## 4 Notes

- 1. See accompanying instruction manual for further details.
- 2. Once thawed, reconstituted DNase I is stable for up to 6 weeks at 4 °C. Do not refreeze the aliquots after thawing. Never vortex DNase I, because this enzyme is ultrasensitive to physical denaturation.
- 3.    f  qPCR thermocyclers from other suppliers are going to be I used,  appropriate  modifi  cations  to  our  protocol  should  be

- preliminarily determined (for instance, the reaction volumes, the PCR reaction settings, usage of reference dyes in the master mix, and so forth).
- . 4 Many qPCR master mix solutions are commercially available. If using qPCR master mix purchased from a different company, we suggest carefully reviewing the accompanying product insert. Changes in the reaction preparation and/or in the PCR reaction (for  instance,  the  initial  denaturation  step  or  the  annealing/ elongation step) may vary, as the length of the denaturation step depends on the polymerase included in the master mix.
- .   Among the commercially available kits, we have experimentally 5 verifi  ed that the 'RNeasy mini kit' works well, because it facilitates purifi  cation of high-quality RNA (not degraded, salt- and genomic  DNA-free),  whose  integrity  and  purity  are  easily assessed by denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis or, in case of very low amount of material, by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. In addition,  this  kit  permits  the  use  of  an  on-  column  DNase digestion step, thereby avoiding potential DNase carryover.
- .   We strongly recommend working with highly pure neutrophil 6 preparations obtained by negative immunoselection with magnetic  beads  (EasySep  neutrophil  enrichment  kit,  StemCell Technologies). Preparation purity can be rapidly checked by flow cytometry for the high CD66b surface expression of neutrophil.  Using  this  procedure  contamination  by  eosinophils, which were co-purifi  ed with the conventional density gradient sedimentation method (varying from 1 to 8 % depending on the donor), is excluded. The same is also true for mononuclear leukocytes (monocytes and lymphocytes) whose presence, as low as 1 %, may greatly infl  uence the results attributed to neutrophils. Most importantly, the presence of as little as 0.01 % contaminating monocytes, likely generating false-positive results, in the neutrophil culture can be revealed by the analysis of cytokines such as IL-6 (Fig.   2  ), IFN β , and/or IL-10 (not shown) expression.
- 7. Some neutrophil agonists, such as LPS, other Toll-like receptor  (TLR)  ligands,  or  tumor  necrosis  factor  (TNF)α ,  cause strong cell adherence to the culture vessel, especially within the first 2 h of incubation. In this case, we suggest removing culture medium and adding RLT buffer directly into the well.
- .   The quality of the cDNA template depends on the integrity of 8 the RNA. All possible precautions must be taken in order to maintain an RNase-free environment when handling/ manipulating RNA. Hands and dust particles may carry common  sources  of  RNase  contamination,  such  as  bacteria  and molds. Always wear gloves and change them frequently. Because RNases are less active at cold temperature, we suggest keeping samples chilled on ice, especially following RNA extraction.

- .   DNA  digestion  is  a  necessary  step  in  all  cases  in  which 9 ontaminating  genomic  DNA can interfere with subsequent c applications. The RNeasy kit offers the optional step of 'oncolumn' DNase treatment, which we always perform. If a different kit for RNA purifi  cation is used, genomic DNA should be removed by a DNase digestion step following RNA isolation. To avoid the risk of a possible DNase carryover, which could be detrimental for the subsequent cDNA synthesis step, we recommend performing phenol-chloroform treatment of all RNA samples after DNase treatment.
- 10.   The  excitation  maximum  for  RiboGreen  reagent  bound  to RNA is ~500 nm and the emission maximum is ~525 nm.
- 11.   Because  even  a  small  amount  of  contaminants  can  greatly impact  results  of  the  assay,  use  of  molecular  biology-grade water, RNase/DNase/nucleic acid-free tubes, aerosol-barrier pipet tips, and dedicated pipettors of all types (i.e., pipettors used only for RNA or PCR applications, which are kept out of areas used for plasmid or genomic DNA work) is strongly recommended for all steps. The use of a small PCR hood may be very  helpful  to  avoid  PCR  contamination.  If  a  hood  is  not available, perform PCR in a dedicated space, possibly at distance from the thermocycler or spaces in which the electrophoresis equipment are located.
- 12.   We suggest processing all samples from each experiment at the same time, starting from the same amount of RNA for each sample. This reduces differences in the quality and quantity of cDNAs  obtained  and  increases  the  reliability  of  the  fi  nal RT-qPCR results. If RNA recovery is low following the RNA purifi  cation  step,  RT  can  be  performed  with  &lt;1 μ g of RNA without  major  problems.  However,  we  suggest  that  the  RT reaction be performed with ≥ 0.1 μ g of RNA.
- 13.   Because most of the primers we use in RT-qPCR span an exon junction, the -RT control is not needed for every sample. We usually perform -RT controls only for new primer pairs and occasionally on random samples.
- 14.   Specifi  city of the qPCR reaction can be confi  rmed by melting curve analysis, where the presence of different PCR products is refl  ected in the number of fi  rst-derivative melting peaks. The melting curve analysis is set as fi  nal step of the qPCR program by gradually heating the qPCR product (from 60 to 95 °C) and recording the fl  uorescence value every 0.5 °C. As the temperature increases from 60 to 95 °C, the fi  nal double-  strand PCR product is denatured, intercalating SYBR Green is released, and the fl  uorescence intensity is decreased ( see Fig.   3a  ). The fl  uorescence intensity vs. temperature plotted as fi  rst derivative (-d    / I d    )  generates the melting curve. The presence of more than T one peak indicates that more than one PCR product has been

- formed and that the PCR reaction is not specifi  c. The negative control, containing PCR primers but no template, could give rise to a peak in the melting curve that usually has a low Tm and is formed in the last PCR cycles. This peak is usually representative of primer dimer formation.
- 15.   Normalization to an endogenous reference gene or genes is the preferred method to more accurately quantify the expression levels of a given mRNA. To select a stable reference gene it is very important to avoid acquisition of biologically irrelevant data. Unfortunately it is very hard to identify a single reference gene stable in all the possible experimental conditions that can be tested; therefore, the best approach that we have found  is  to  always  measure  two-three  reference  genes  and use the more stable one for normalization. The genes that we commonly test are glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH),  ribosomal  protein  L32  (RPL32),  peptidylprolyl isomerase B (PPIB), and β 2-microglobulin (B2M).
- 16.   Primer designing is a crucial step for performance of qPCR. Primers should be designed according to standard PCR guidelines. A good primer (1) is 19-24 bases in length; (2) preferably has a base composition of 50-60 % in G+C; (3) preferably has a primer ending at the 3 -end that is a G or a C, or CG or ' GC: this prevents 'breathing' of ends and increases effi  ciency of priming; (4) has no runs of three or more Cs or Gs at the 3 -end of primers, which may promote mispriming at G- or ' C-rich sequences (because of stability of annealing) and should be avoided; (5) has 3 -ends that are not complementary (i.e., ' base pair), as otherwise primer dimers will be synthesized preferentially  to  any  other  product;  and  (6)  has  no  primer  selfcomplementarity (ability to form 2° structures such as hairpins). To optimize effi  ciency, the product of qPCR must be approx 80-250 bp. Melting temperature (Tm) of the primers should be 60-64 °C; it is important that all the primers function at the same annealing temperature, thereby allowing analysis of different targets in the same plate. When designing primers for RT-qPCR, we suggest identifying at least one primer that overlaps an exon-exon boundary in order to prevent the amplifi  cation of genomic DNA. Alternatively, the two primers should anneal to two different exons on each side of an intron. A public database for the selection of primer sequences suitable for RT-qPCR, RTPrimerDB, is available at the following website: ttp:/ /medgen.ugent.be/rtprimerdb/index.php h [  16  ]. Our primers are designed with the PerlPrimer software [  17  ], which is free at   http:/ /perlprimer  .sourceforge.net. The specifi  city of the identifi  ed primers can be computationally tested by PrimerBLAST [  18  ].  This  software  tool  permits  to  identify  all  the possible PCR products that can be formed, on the whole transcriptome, using different primer pairs. If potential erroneous

- amplicons  are  detected  using the Primer-BLAST  default parameters, different primer pairs should be designed.
- 17.    t is possible to use 1 pg to 100 ng of cDNA in a qPCR reaction, I and the amount available will likely depend on the quantity of total RNA isolated from neutrophils. We experimentally determined that 3 ng of cDNA is an optimal amount and permits quantifi  cation of low- and high-expression transcripts.
- 18.    Note that there is a risk for pipetting errors associated with manipulating very small vol (&lt;2 μ L) that could cause differential input of template.
- 19.    For  most of the cytokine genes, baseline can be set at cycle range  3-15.  For  low-expression  genes  this  value  should  be extended to 3-20.
- 20.    In our conditions, the threshold is usually set at a fl  uorescence value ( Δ Rn) of 0.1 for all the genes. Because plate variation introduced during the PCR run is minimal in the current generation of real-time PCR cyclers, the ViiA7 software enables the  analysis  of  different  genes  on  different  plates,  a  feature especially useful when many genes are analyzed using the same samples.
- 21.    Amplifi  cation effi  ciency of the reaction is an important consideration when performing relative quantifi  cation. An effi  ciency value of 2 means that the PCR product doubles during every cycle within the exponential phase of the reaction. However, many PCR reactions do not have ideal amplifi  cation effi  ciencies, and calculation without an appropriate correction factor may overestimate starting concentration. We use as amplifi  cation  effi  ciency  for  each  gene  analyzed  (including  reference genes) the average of amplifi  cation effi  ciencies calculated by LinRegPCR [  14  ] for each single sample. Data input and output are through an Excel spreadsheet. The LinRegPCR software is freely available at   http:/ /LinRegPCR.nl  .
- 22. Q-Gene is an Excel-based software available free for download at   http:/ /www.gene-quantifi  cation.de/download.html#qgene [  15  ].

## Acknowledgments

This work was supported by grants from the Ministero dell'Istruzione, dell'Università e della Ricerca (2009MFXE7L\_001 and 200999KRFW\_004), Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro  (AIRC,  IG-11782),  Fondazione  Cassa  di  Risparmio  di Verona, Vicenza, Belluno e Ancona, and the University of Verona (a Joint  Project\_2010  grant).  N.T.  is  recipient  of  an  FIRC Fellowship.

## References

- .   Mantovani A, Cassatella MA, Costantini C et al 1 (2011) Neutrophils in the activation and regulation  of  innate  and  adaptive  immunity.  Nat Rev Immunol 11:519-531
- 2. Wang T, Brown MJ (1999) mRNA quantifi  cation  by  real  time  TaqMan  polymerase  chain reaction: validation and comparison with RNase protection. Anal Biochem 269:198-201
- .   Malinen E, Kassinen A, Rinttila T et al (2003) 3 Comparison  of  real-time PCR  with  SYBR Green  I  or  5'-nuclease  assays  and  dot-blot hybridization with rDNA-targeted oligonucleotide probes in quantifi  cation of selected faecal bacteria. Microbiology 149:269-277
- .   Palmer 4 S, Wiegand  AP,  Maldarelli  F  et  al (2003)  New  real-time  reverse  transcriptaseinitiated PCR assay with single-copy sensitivity for human immunodefi  ciency virus type 1 RNA in plasma. J Clin Microbiol 41:4531-4536
- .   Arikawa E, Sun Y, Wang J et al (2008) Cross5 platform comparison of SYBR Green real-time PCR with TaqMan PCR, microarrays and other gene expression measurement technologies evaluated  in  the  MicroArray  Quality  Control (MAQC) study. BMC Genomics 9:328
- .   Nagalakshmi U, Wang Z, Waern K et al (2008) 6 The  transcriptional landscape of the yeast genome defi  ned by RNA sequencing. Science 320:1344-1349
- .   Pelletier M, Maggi L, Micheletti A et al (2010) 7 Evidence for a cross-talk between human neutrophils and Th17 cells. Blood 115:335-343
- 8. Bazzoni  F,  Cassatella  MA,  Laudanna  C  et  al (1991) Phagocytosis of opsonized yeast induces tumor necrosis factor-alpha mRNA accumulation and protein release by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. J Leukoc Biol 50:223-228
- .   Tamassia  N,  Le  Moigne  V,  Calzetti  F  et  al 9 (2007)  The  MyD88-independent  pathway  is not mobilized in human neutrophils stimulated via TLR4. J Immunol 178:7344-7356

- 10.   Davey MS, Tamassia N, Rossato M et al (2011) Failure to detect production of IL-10 by activated human neutrophils. Nat Immunol 12:1017-1018, author reply 1018-1020
- 11.   Wang P, Wu  P,  Anthes  JC  et al (1994) Interleukin-10  inhibits  interleukin-8  production in human neutrophils. Blood 83: 2678-2683
- 12.   Reglier H, Arce-Vicioso M, Fay M et al (1998) Lack of IL-10 and IL-13 production by human polymorphonuclear neutrophils. Cytokine 10:192-198
- 13.   Livak  KJ,  Schmittgen  TD  (2001)  Analysis  of relative  gene  expression  data  using  real-time quantitative PCR  and  the  2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods 25:402-408
- 14.   Ruijter JM, Ramakers C, Hoogaars WM et al (2009)  Amplifi  cation  effi  ciency:  linking  baseline and bias in the analysis of quantitative PCR data. Nucleic Acids Res 37:e45
- 15.   Muller PY, Janovjak H, Miserez AR et al (2002) Processing of gene expression data generated by quantitative  real-time  RT-PCR.  Biotechniques 32: 1372-1374, 1376, 1378-1379
- 16.   Lefever  S,  Vandesompele  J,  Speleman  F  et  al (2009) RTPrimerDB: the portal for real-time PCR  primers  and  probes.  Nucleic  Acids  Res 37:D942-D945
- 17.   Marshall OJ (2004) PerlPrimer: crossplatform, graphical primer design for standard, bisulphite  and  real-time  PCR.  Bioinformatics 20:2471-2472
- 18.   Ye  J,  Coulouris  G,  Zaretskaya  I  et  al  (2012) Primer-BLAST: a tool to design target-specifi  c primers  for  polymerase  chain  reaction.  BMC Bioinformatics 13:134
- 19.   Tamassia N, Cassatella MA, Bazzoni F (2007) Fast and accurate quantitative analysis of cytokine gene expression in human neutrophils by reverse  transcription  real-time  PCR.  Methods Mol Biol 412:455-471