<!-- image -->

## Edited by:

Fabrice Cognasse, The Rhone-Alpes-Auvergne Regional Branch of the French National Blood System, France

## Reviewed by:

Nicolas Flamand, Laval University, Canada Silvano Sozzani, University of Brescia, Italy

## *Correspondence:

Stefania Loffredo stefanialoffredo@hotmail.com; Gianni Marone marone@unina.it

## Specialty section:

This article was submitted to Inflammation, a section of the journal Frontiers in Immunology

Received:

25 January 2017

Accepted:

30 March 2017

Published:

19 April 2017

## Citation:

Loffredo S, Borriello F, Iannone R, Ferrara AL, Galdiero MR, Gigantino V, Esposito P , Varricchi G, Lambeau G, Cassatella MA, Granata F and Marone G (2017) Group V Secreted Phospholipase A2 Induces the Release of Proangiogenic and Antiangiogenic Factors by Human Neutrophils. Front. Immunol. 8:443. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00443

<!-- image -->

## group V secreted Phospholipase a2 induces the release of Proangiogenic and antiangiogenic Factors by human neutrophils

Stefania Loffredo 1 *, Francesco Borriello 1,2 , Raffaella Iannone 1 , Anne L. Ferrara 1 , Maria R. Galdiero 1 , Vincenzo Gigantino 3 , Pasquale Esposito 4 , Gilda Varricchi 1 , Gerard Lambeau 5 , Marco A. Cassatella 6 , Francescopaolo Granata 1  and Gianni Marone 1,7 *

1 Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Center for Basic and Clinical Immunology Research (CISI), University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy,    Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 2 USA,  3   Pathology Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumori Fondazione 'G. Pascale', Naples, Italy,  4   U.O.C. Immunohematology and Transfusion Medicine, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy,  5   CNRS, Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université Côte d'Azur, Valbonne Sophia Antipolis, France,  6   Department of Medicine, Division of General Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy,  7 CNR Institute of Experimental Endocrinology and Oncology 'G. Salvatore', Naples, Italy

Secreted phospholipases A2 (sPLA2s) are extracellular enzymes that catalyze the release of free fatty acids and lysophospholipids from membrane phospholipids and also bind to different receptors (e.g., PLA2R1 or integrins). To date, 12 mammalian sPLA2s have been identified, which play a critical role in pathophysiological processes including inflammation and cancer. sPLA2s activate immune cells such as human neutrophils (PMNs) by enzymatic activity- or receptor-mediated mechanisms. In addition, human PMNs synthesize and store human group V (hGV) and human group X (hGX) sPLA2s in their granules, but only the former is released upon cellular activation. We investigated the effects of sPLA2s on the release of proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors by PMNs. We found that exogenous hGV and hGX sPLA2s induce the release of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A, angiopoietin 1 (Ang1), and CXCL8/IL-8. Only hGV induces the secretion of the antiangiogenic isoform of VEGF-A, namely, VEGF-A165b. While the release of VEGF-A, Ang1, and CXCL8/IL-8 was likely mediated by hGV enzymatic activity and/or binding to PLA2R1 and heparan sulfate proteoglycans, the release of VEGF-A165b requires the interaction with α β V 3 and α β 4 1 integrins. We also provide evidence that endogenous hGV released by N -formyl-met-leu-phe (fMLF)-activated PMNs is involved in the release of angiogenic factors. The translational relevance of these data is supported by our findings that hGV expression is increased in human samples of lung cancer which are infiltrated by PMNs. Overall, our results suggest that the hGV-neutrophil axis may play a relevant role in the modulation of cancer-related inflammation and angiogenesis.

Keywords: secreted phospholipase a2, neutrophil, vascular endothelial growth factor, angiopoietin, lung tumor, integrin, Pla2r1

## inTrODUcTiOn

Secreted phospholipases A2 (sPLA2s) are extracellular enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of the sn -2 position of membrane glycerophospholipids to release free fatty acids and lysophospholipids, thereby  regulating  several  processes  including  the  production  of  lipid  mediators  (1).  However, sPLA2 effects are not related only to their enzymatic activity but also to their ability to activate target

cells through the engagement of different targets [e.g., PLA2R1, heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), integrins] (2-9). To date, 12  mammalian  sPLA2s,  namely,  groups  IB,  IIA,  IIC,  IID,  IIE, IIF, III, V , X, XIIA, XIIB, and otoconin-95, have been identified (5, 10). They often play critical roles in pathophysiological processes, including inflammation and cancer (1, 5, 11, 12). Indeed, sPLA2s are expressed in inflamed tissues and tumors (1, 12-15). In addition, several immune cells are both sources and/or targets of sPLA2s (16-21). In particular, sPLA2s activate human neutrophils (PMNs) inducing elastase and CXCL8/IL-8 release and activating ERK1/2 and p38 MAP kinases by a receptor-mediated mechanism (8, 21-23). In addition, PMNs store human group V (hGV) and human group X (hGX) in their granules (16, 19), but only the former is released in response to the bacterial N -formylmethionyl peptide, formyl-methionyl-leucylphenylalanine (fMLF) (16, 19).

PMNs are innate immune cells with primary roles in the acute phase  of  inflammation  and  resistance  against  invading  pathogens (24). Because of their terminally differentiated phenotype and short half-life, the role of PMNs in tumor development has been considered marginal. Recent evidence changed this point of view. Indeed, tumor-associated neutrophils (TAN) can exert anti-tumoral  as  well  as  pro-tumoral  functions  and  findings derived from murine models suggest that PMNs display unsuspected  plasticity  (25,  26).  Epidemiological  studies  indicate  an association between TAN and clinical outcome in several but not all tumors (27-33). In early stages of lung tumors, PMNs exert immunostimulatory properties but acquire immunosuppressive features as the disease progresses (34, 35). There is some evidence that PMNs can modulate tumor initiation and growth through the production of angiogenic factors (36), but further investigations are required to better understand the role of PMNs in modulating tumor angiogenesis.

Angiogenesis,  the formation  of new  blood  vessels, and lymphangiogenesis, the formation of new lymphatic vessels, are complex processes that require the coordinated action of several factors, namely, vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs) and angiopoietins [angiopoietin 1 (Ang1) and Ang2] (37, 38). Several proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors have been identified. VEGF-A  and  VEGF-B  are  key  mitogens  for  endothelial  cells and can act both as pro- and antiangiogenic factors due to the different spliced forms (39-41). For instance, the splicing variant VEGF-A165  exists  in  two  different  isoforms:  VEGF-A165a  is  the most  potent  proangiogenic  variant,  whereas  VEGF-A165b  is  an antiangiogenic  isoform  (42-44).  Endothelial  cell  maturation  is also  promoted  by  the  angiopoietins  (Ang1  and  Ang2),  whose role can be either proangiogenic or antiangiogenic depending on the microenvironment (45, 46). The key regulators of lymphangiogenesis are VEGF-C and VEGF-D (38, 47).

Immune  cells  are  important  sources  as  well  as  targets  of proangiogenic  and  antiangiogenic  factors  (48).  In  particular, PMNs  release  a  variety  of  proangiogenic  and  antiangiogenic factors and play important roles in several models of inflammatory and tumor angiogenesis (36, 49-51). Indeed, PMNs release VEGF-A in response to fMLF, LPS, and phorbolmyristate acetate (PMA), while Ang1 is secreted only in response to PMA (50). It is unknown whether sPLA2s can modulate the production of proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors from PMNs.

Since we demonstrated that sPLA2s induce the production of angiogenic factors from human macrophages (17), in this study, we sought to investigate the production of pro- and antiangiogenic factors by PMNs in response to different forms of sPLA2s.

## MaTerials anD MeThODs

## reagents

The following were purchased: l-glutamine, antibioticantimycotic solution (10,000 IU/ml penicillin, 10 mg/ml streptomycin,  and  25  µg/ml  amphotericin  B),  Triton  X-100, Histopaque -1077,  bovin  serum  albumin  (BSA),  Heparinase  I ® and III  Blend  from Flavobacterium heparinum , N -formyl-metleu-phe (fMLF), phenolphthalein β -d-glucuronide sodium salt, detoxified LPS (from E. coli serotype 0111:B4), PMA, brefeldin A, and cycloheximide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA); RPMI and  fetal  calf  serum  (FCS,  endotoxin  level &lt; 0.1  EU/ml)  (MP Biomedicals  Europe,  Illkirch,  France);  P11,  TCS  2314  (Tocris Bioscience,  UK);  anti-human  VEGF-A165  (monoclonal  mouse IgG2B;  Clone  26603)  and  anti-human  VEGF165b  (monoclonal mouse  IgG1;  Clone  56-1)  (R&amp;D  System,  Minneapolis,  MN, USA). Target-specific primers for VEGFA165a , VEGFA165b , VEGFB , VEGFC VEGFD Ang1 , , , Ang2 ,  and β -actin were  produced  and purified  by  Custom  Primers  (Life  Technologies,  Milan,  Italy). The recombinant sPLA2s human group IB, hGIIA, hGIIE, hGIIF, hGV,  hGX,  and  hGXIIA  and  the  inhibitors  Me-Indoxam  and RO092906A were prepared in the laboratory of Gerard Lambeau and were a generous gift from and Michael H. Gelb (Departments of  Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA). sPLA2 preparations were routinely checked for LPS contamination ( Limulus amebocyte Test,  MP  Biomedicals)  and discarded if the LPS concentration was above the detection limit of the assay (0.125 EU/ml). All other reagents were from Carlo Erba (Milan, Italy).

## isolation and Purification of human neutrophils

Granulocytes were isolated from buffy coats of healthy donors  obtained  from  the  Leukapheresis  Unit.  After  dextran sedimentation,  PMNs  were  obtained  by  centrifugation  over Histopaque -1077 at 400 ® × g for 30 min, at 22°C, at a 1:1 ratio. Finally,  PMNs  were  isolated  by  negatively  removing  all  contaminating cells using the MACSxpress Neutrophil Isolation Kit and  MACSxpress  Erythrocyte  Depletion  Kit  (Miltenyi  Biotec, Bologna, Italy). This procedure yields a population of CD66b + cells with a purity greater than 99% as assessed by flow cytometry. PMNs were suspended (5 × 10   cells/ml) in complete medium 6 (RPMI  1640  containing  5%  FCS,  2  mM  l-glutamine,  and  1% antibiotic-antimycotic solution) and incubated in different plates (Falcon, Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air. After 30 min of rest, the cells were used for the experiments.

## cell incubations

PMNs were incubated (37°C, 5  min-3  h)  in  RPMI  1640  containing  5%  FCS,  2  mM  l-glutamine,  and  1%  antibiotic-anti-

tic  solution  and  stimulated  with  various  concentrations (0.3-10 µg/ml) of human GIB, GIIA, GIIE, GIIF, GIII, GV , GX, GXIIA, fMLF (50 nM), detoxified LPS (100 ng/ml), and PMA (80 nM). In selected experiments, hGV and hGX (3 µg/ml) were preincubated  (37°C,  20  min)  with  increasing  concentrations (0.01-10 µM) of their inhibitors Me-Indoxam or RO092906A. In other  experiments,  PMNs  were  preincubated  (37°C,  1  h)  with  heparinase (0.4 U/ml) or (37°C, 30 min) with P11 (100 nM) and/or TCS 2314 (100 nM), brefeldin A (10 µg/ml), cycloheximide (10 µg/ml) and  then  stimulated  (37°C,  30  min)  with  hGV  (3  µg/ml).  In selected experiments, PMNs were preincubated (37°C, 15 min) with Me-Indoxam or RO092906A and then stimulated with fMLF (37°C, 10 min). At the end of the experiment, the supernatants were removed, centrifuged (1,000 × g , 4°C, 5 min) and stored at -80°C for subsequent determination of mediator release.

## rT-Pcr

Total cellular RNA was isolated from PMNs using the SV RNA isolation system (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), treated with RNasefree DNase I and resuspended in DEPC water. RNA concentration and quality were assessed by spectrophotometry. Total mRNA was reverse-transcribed (Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase 200 U, Life  Technologies)  and  quantitative  PCR  (qPCR)  was  carried out  in  iCycler-iQ5  real-time  PCR  detection  system  (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) using SYBR Green Master Mix (Bio-Rad). Target-specific primers for VEGF165a , VEGFA165b , VEGFB VEGFC , , VEGFD Ang1 Ang2 , , , and β -actin suitable for qPCR were produced and purified by Custom Primers (Life Technologies, Milan, Italy) and are reported in Table 1 . β -Actin was used as housekeeping gene  to  normalize  cycle  threshold  ( Ct )  values  using  the  2 -Δ Ct formula. The data were analyzed with iCycler iQ analysis software (Bio-Rad).

## Mediator release assays

The concentration of VEGF-A, VEGFA165b, VEGF-B, VEGF-C, VEGF-D, Ang1, Ang2, and CXCL8/IL-8 in the supernatants, lysed or freshly isolated PMNs (lysed in Tryton 0.1%) was measured in duplicate determinations using commercially available ELISA kits  (R&amp;D  System).  The  ELISA  sensitivity  is  31.1-2,000  pg/ml

for  VEGF-A, 31.1-4,000 pg/ml for VEGF-A165b, 9.4-300 pg/ml for VEGF-B, 62-4,000 pg/ml for VEGF-C, 31.1-2,000 pg/ml for VEGF-D, 156.25-10,000 pg/ml for Ang1, 31.1-4,000 pg/ml for Ang2, and 31.1-2,000 pg/ml for CXCL8/IL-8. β -Glucuronidase release was measured with a colorimetric assay.

## Pla2 activity assay

A  modified  liposomal-based  fluorescent  assay  was  used  to measure  PLA2  activity  in  neutrophil  supernatants.  Briefly,  a PLA2  substrate  cocktail  consisting  of  7-hydroxycoumarinylarachidonate (0.3 mM), 7-hydroxycoumarinyl-linolenate (0.3 mM), hydroxycoumarinyl-6 heptenoate (0.3 mM), 10 mM dioleoylphosphatidylcholine (DOPC), and 10 mM dioleoylphosphatidylglycerol  (DOPG)  was  prepared  in  ethanol.  Liposomes were formed by gradually adding 77 µl substrate/lipid cocktail to 10 ml PLA2 buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.9, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2) while stirring rapidly over 1 min using a magnetic stirrer (Invitrogen EnzChek ® phospholipase A2 assay). Neutrophil supernatants (50 µl) was added to 96-well plates, and PLA2 activity was initiated by adding 50 µl substrate cocktail. Fluorescence (excitation at 360 nm and emission at 460 nm) was measured, and specific activity (relative fluorescent units/ μ g  protein/min) for each sample was calculated.

## immunohistochemistry analysis of non-Tumor and Tumor lung Tissues for hgV and cD66b

Non-tumor and tumor lung tissues were obtained from patients affected by lung adenocarcinoma (HCV , HBsAg , and HIV-1 ) ---undergoing lung resection. Immunohistochemical staining has been  carried  out  on  4-µm  lung  cancer  serial  sections  from formalin-fixed,  paraffin-embedded  tissues,  in  order  to  evaluate  the  expression  of  hGV  and  CD66b. Negative control slides without primary antibody were included for each staining (not shown). Paraffin slides were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated through graded alcohols. Antigen retrieval was performed with slides heated in 1 mM EDTA buffer (pH 9.0) for hGV and 0.01 M citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for CD66b, in a bath for 20 min at 97°C. After antigen retrieval, the slides were allowed to cool

TaBle 1 | Primer sequences and conditions for quantitative Pcr.

| Target    |   Product length (bp) |   Ta (°c) | Primer (5 -3 ) ' '                                              | genBank accession no. or reference   |
|-----------|-----------------------|-----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| VEGFA165a |                    79 |        60 | Forward: GCCTTGCCTTGCTGCTCTAC Reverse: TGATTCTGCCCTCCTCCTTCTG   | NM\_003376                            |
| VEGFA165b |                   157 |        60 | Forward: GAGCAAGACAAGAAAATCCC Reverse: GTGAGAGATCTGCAAGTACG     | (43)                                 |
| VEGFB     |                   128 |        60 | Forward: AGGACAGAGTTGGAAGAGGAG Reverse: AGGAAGAGCCAGTTGTAAGATG  | NM-003377                            |
| VEGFC     |                   197 |        60 | Forward: ATGTTTTCCTCGGATGCTGGA Reverse: CATTGGCTGGGGAAGAGTTT    | NM\_005429                            |
| VEGFD     |                   226 |        60 | Forward: GTATGGACTCTCGCTCAGCAT Reverse: AGGCTCTCTTCATTGCAACAG   | NM\_004469                            |
| Ang1      |                    73 |        60 | Forward: CAGGAGGATGGTGGTTTGATG Reverse: TGGTTTTGTCCCGCAGTATAGAA | NM\_001314051                         |
| Ang2      |                    65 |        60 | Forward: TTCCTCCTGCCAGAGATGGA Reverse: TGCACAGCATTGGACACGTA     | NM\_001118888                         |
| β -Actin  |                    99 |        60 | Forward: TGCGTGACATTAAGGAGAAG Reverse: GCTCGTAGCTCTTCTCCA       | NM\_001101                            |

Ta, annealing temperature.

and rinsed with TBS. The endogenous peroxidase activity was inactivated  with  3%  hydrogen  peroxide.  Following  the  protein block  (BSA  5%  in  PBS  1 × ),  the  slides  were  incubated  with  a polyclonal  rabbit  antibody  against  hGV  (NBP2-31558,  Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO, USA, dilution 1:100) or a monoclonal mouse anti-human CD66b antibody (555723, BD Pharmingen, San Jose, CA, USA, dilution 1:400 at 4°C overnight). The sections were rinsed in TBS and incubated with biotinylated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse antibodies, respectively, for 1 h at room temperature. Immunoreactivity  was  visualized  using  3,3 -diaminobenzidine ' (DAB) and avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex. Finally, sections were  weakly  counterstained  with  hematoxylin,  mounted,  and interpreted using light microscope.

## statistical analysis

The data are expressed as mean values ± SD of the indicated number of experiments. Statistical analysis was performed with Prism 6 (GraphPad Software) by one-way analysis of variance followed by Dunnett's test (when comparison was made against a control) or Bonferroni's test (when comparison was made between each pair of groups). Statistically significant differences were accepted when the p value was at least ≤ 0.05.

## resUlTs

## sPla2s induce the release of Proangiogenic and antiangiogenic Factors by PMns

To evaluate the impact of sPLA2 on the production of angiogenic and lymphangiogenic factors by human PMNs, we first assessed the basal expression of VEGFs and Angs. Freshly isolated PMNs constitutively  expressed  VEGF-A,  VEGF-B,  and  Ang1  at  both mRNA and protein levels. By contrast, no expression of VEGF-C and  VEGF-D  (lymphangiogenic  factors)  and  Ang2  could  be detected  ( Figures  1A,B ). Interestingly, PMNs  constitutively expressed VEGF-A165b ( Figures 1A,B ), the antiangiogenic splice variant of VEGF-A165 (42).

We then evaluated the effects of several human recombinant sPLA2s on the secretion of VEGF-A, VEGF-A165b, VEGF-B, and Ang1 as well as the proangiogenic chemokine CXCL8/IL-8 from PMNs. Several sPLA2s induced the release of VEGF-A ( Figure 2A ) and CXCL8/IL-8 ( Figure 2B ) and promoted the release of Ang1 ( Figure 2C ). However, at the concentration used (5 µg/ml), the release of VEGFA and CXCL8 was significant upon stimulation with  hGV  and  hGX,  and  the  release  of  Ang1  was  significant

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

upon  stimulation  with  hGIIF,  hGV ,  and  hGX.  These  results were paralleled  by  the  highest β -glucuronidase release used as a marker of exocytosis (Figure S1A in Supplementary Material) suggesting the release of preformed mediators rather than de novo synthesis. By contrast, no secretion of VEGF-B (Figure S1B in Supplementary Material) could be observed in any of the tested conditions. Interestingly, hGV and, to a lesser extent, hGIIA were the only sPLA2s to induce the secretion VEGF-A165b ( Figure 2D ).

To  better  understand  the  mechanisms  of  sPLA2  neutrophil stimulation, we performed dose-response and time-dependent experiments with hGV and hGX sPLA2s, which are more effective in stimulating human PMNs and are the only sPLA2s expressed by these cells (16). Figure 3 shows that the release of VEGF-A ( Figure 3A ), CXCL8/IL-8 ( Figure 3B ), and Ang1 ( Figure 3C ) in response to hGV and hGX was induced by concentrations as low as 1 µg/ml. By contrast, Figure 3D shows that VEGF-A165b secretion was observed only with hGV , but not with hGX, at all tested concentrations.  Moreover,  hGV  induced  the  release  of  these mediators as early as after 5 min of stimulation ( Figures 3E,H ).

To  verify  whether  hGV-induced  secretion  of  proangiogenic and antiangiogenic mediators requires de novo protein synthesis, neutrophils were stimulated with hGV in the presence or absence of brefeldin A (an inhibitor of anterograde cellular transport and protein secretion) or cycloheximide (an inhibitor of protein synthesis). Neither brefeldin A nor cycloheximide affected the spontaneous release of VEGF-A, CXCL8/IL-8, Ang1, and VEGF-A165b (data not shown). However, brefeldin A but not cycloheximide significantly inhibited the release of these mediators induced by hGV (Table S1 in Supplementary Material). Moreover, we measured VEGF-A, Ang1, and VEGF-A165b protein levels in supernatants and cellular lysates of unstimulated and hGV-stimulated PMNs

and  found  that  total  protein  levels  (supernatants  plus  cellular lysates) of angiogenic mediators were not significantly modulated by hGV stimulation (Table S2 in Supplementary Material).

To corroborate these findings and to exclude a non-specific PMN activation by sPLA2, we assessed the secretion of VEGF-A, VEGF-A165b, Ang1, and CXCL8/IL-8 following the stimulation of PMNs with well-known neutrophil stimuli, such as fMLF, PMA, and LPS. Even though all these  stimuli  induced  the  release  of VEGF-A ( Figure 4A )  and CXCL8/IL-8 ( Figure 4B ),  the secretion of Ang1 ( Figure 4C ) was only induced by PMA. By contrast, none  of  the  tested  stimuli  induced  the  release  of  VEGF-A165b ( Figure 4D ). Taken together, these results indicate that hGV was the only sPLA2 able to induce the release of preformed pro- and antiangiogenic molecules, whereas the effect of hGX was limited to proangiogenic factors.

## hgV-induced secretion of angiogenic and antiangiogenic Factors requires the interaction with Different Targets

Several evidences demonstrate that PMNs express PLA2R1 that is  involved  in  sPLA2-induced  neutrophil  activation  (8,  21-23). To verify whether hGV enzymatic activity and/or PLA2R1 were involved  in  the  production  of  pro-  and  antiangiogenic  factors  induced  by  hGV ,  we  stimulated  PMNs  in  the  presence  of Me-Indoxam. This inhibitor protrudes out of the catalytic groove when bound to sPLA2s, thereby leading to steric hindrance and hence interfering with the sPLA2-receptor interaction (52). We have previously shown that Me-Indoxam prevents receptor-mediated activation of HLMs and PMNs stimulated with sPLA2s (17, 18, 21, 53). hGV also binds HSPGs that mediate its internalization

<!-- image -->

(8). To verify a possible role for HSPGs, PMNs were pre-treated with heparinase to eliminate surface HSPGs before stimulation with  hGV.  Both  Me-indoxam  and  heparinase  pre-treatment markedly reduced the secretion of VEGF-A ( Figure 5A ), CXCL8/ IL-8 ( Figure 5B ), and Ang1 ( Figure 5C ). Surprisingly, the release of VEGF-A165b ( Figure 5D ) was not inhibited, instead it was significantly increased by Me-Indoxam and to a lesser extent also by heparinase pre-treatment. To explain these findings, we reasoned that Me-Indoxam and heparinase pre-treatment could enhance hGV binding to a different cell surface target on PMNs.

Two independent studies have shown that sPLA2s can activate human monocytes by binding to α β V 3 and α β 4 1 integrins (3, 7), which are also expressed on PMNs (54, 55). hGIIA is structurally related to hGV (8, 56) and binds to α β V 3 and α β 4 1 integrins through a specific domain, different from the catalytic center or

the PLA2R1-binding site (3, 7). To investigate whether integrins could be involved in hGV-mediated release of VEGF-A165b, we stimulated PMNs with hGV in the presence of the two integrin antagonists  P11  and  TCS  2314,  which  inhibit α β V 3 and α β 4 1 , respectively (57, 58). The combination of these inhibitors markedly reduced the release of VEGF-A165b ( Figure 5E ).  The  specificity of this finding is supported by the observation that the secretion of CXCL8/IL-8 was not affected ( Figure 5F ).

## endogenous sPla2s Modulate fMlF-induced neutrophil activation in an autocrine Fashion

fMLF induces the release of hGV by human PMNs (16, 19). We confirmed these results,  showing  an  increased  sPLA2  activity  in

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

supernatants from fMLF-stimulated PMNs which was inhibited by Me-Indoxam but not by the hGX-specific inhibitor RO092906A (Figure  S2  in  Supplementary  Material)  (59).  Since  we  found  that  hGV induces VEGF-A, CXCL8/IL-8, Ang1, and VEGF-A165b ( Figure 3 ) release, it would be conceivable that also fMLF induced the release of these mediators in an hGV-dependent manner. However, in our model, fMLF only promoted the secretion of VEGF-A and CXCL8/ IL-8  ( Figure 4 ). Figure 3 shows  that  the  concentration  of  hGV required for the release of VEGF-A ( Figure 3A ) and CXCL8/IL-8 ( Figure 3B )  was 0.3 µg/ml whereas that for the release of Ang1 ( Figure 3C )  and  VEGF-A165b  ( Figure 3D )  was  at  least  1  µg/ml. Therefore, we measured the enzymatic activity of several concentrations  of  recombinant  hGV  and  found  that  the  sPLA2  activity in supernatants from fMLF-stimulated PMNs corresponded to a concentration of recombinant hGV ≤ 0.3 µg/ml (data not shown). Thus, it is likely that the release of hGV in response to fMLF is in  our  conditions  insufficient  to  induce  VEGF-A165b  and  Ang1 release. Nevertheless, we asked whether fMLF-induced secretion of VEGF-A and CXCL8/IL-8 was mediated by the release of endogenous hGV. To address this question, PMNs were stimulated with fMLF in the presence or absence of Me-Indoxam or RO092906A. As  expected,  Me-indoxam  reduced  VEGF-A  ( Figure  6A )  and

CXCL8/IL-8 ( Figure 6B ) secretion while RO092906A had no effect ( Figures 6C,D ), suggesting an involvement of hGV but not hGX in fMLF-mediated neutrophil activation.

## expression of hgV and neutrophils in lung cancers

Our results show that hGV induces the release of proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors by PMNs. Since angiogenesis is a hallmark of cancer-related inflammation (60) and PMNs infiltrate several human tumors (61), we assessed the expression of hGV and CD66b  neutrophils by immunohistochemistry in neoplastic + lung tissue samples. Figure 7 shows that hGV ( Figures 7G,H ) and CD66b ( Figures 7E,F ) were expressed in lung cancer samples  but  not  in  non-tumor areas ( Figures 7A-D ,  respectively). These data suggest that hGV , expressed in lung adenocarcinoma microenvironment,  can  modulate  tumor  angiogenesis  through the activation of TAN.

## DiscUssiOn

This study demonstrates that human PMNs constitutively express and  contain  several  proangiogenic  (VEGF-A165,  VEGF-B,  and

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Ang1)  and  antiangiogenic  (VEGF-A165b)  factors.  Interestingly, human PMNs, similar to other  circulating  immune  cells  (e.g., basophils) (62), do not express lymphangiogenic factors (VEGF-C and  VEGF-D).  We  observed  that  several  human  recombinant sPLA2s can selectively induce the release of pro- and antiangiogenic factors from PMNs. In particular, hGV and hGX, which are the most effective sPLA2s in activating human PMNs, stimulate the  secretion  of  VEGF-A,  Ang1,  and  CXCL8/IL-8,  while  hGV is  unique  in  inducing  VEGF-A165b  secretion.  Critically  and  in contrast with VEGF-A, Ang1, and CXCL8/IL-8, the binding of hGV to integrins appears to be required for VEGF-A165b secretion. Indeed, the effect of hGV on VEGF-A165b secretion was abrogated by the addition of known inhibitors of α β V 3 and α β 4 1 integrins, suggesting  that  hGV  physically  interacts  with  these  integrins. Endogenous hGV is released by fMLF-stimulated human neutrophils and acts in an autocrine/paracrine fashion to modulate VEGF-A and CXCL8/IL-8 release. The translational relevance of these findings is supported by the increased expression of hGV in neutrophil-infiltrated lung cancer samples compared to nontumor lung tissue.

On the one hand, neutrophils are modulators of inflammatory and tumor angiogenesis (36, 51). On the other hand, sPLA2s have been  implicated  in  cancer  (13,  15).  In  this  study,  we  sought  to investigate whether sPLA2s induce PMN secretion of angiogenic factors.  Strikingly,  we  found  a  remarkable  heterogeneity  in  the response to sPLA2s. hGV and hGX induced the highest levels of VEGF-A, Ang1, and CXCL8/IL-8. hGV and, to a lesser extent, hGIIA are the only tested sPLA2s to promote the secretion of the antiangiogenic factor VEGF-A165b. This molecule arises from an alternative splicing at the exon 8 distal site of VEGF-A mRNA and binds  to  both  VEGFR-1  and  VEGFR-2  (but  not  to  co-receptor neuropilin-1) (42). However, VEGF-A165b fails to induce VEGFR-2 tyrosine phosphorylation and to activate the downstream signaling pathway that characterizes the proangiogenic isoform VEGFA165a (42-44). As such, VEGF-A165b restrains tumor growth and impairs angiogenesis in systemic sclerosis and peripheral artery disease  (63-66).  Our  results  support  a  model  in  which  human neutrophil  stimulation  with  hGV  induces  a  mixed  secretion profile whose functional outcome likely depends on the balance between proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors. Further in vitro (e.g., endothelial cell tube formation assays) and ex vivo (e.g.,  immunohistochemistry  analysis  of  neutrophil  infiltration, hGV expression, and vascular patter in tumor biopsies) studies are required to define the role of hGV-induced neutrophil release of proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors in inflammatory and tumor angiogenesis.

Human  group  V,  an  sPLA2  expressed  by  PMNs,  induces VEGF-A,  Ang1,  and  VEGF-A165b  secretion  as  early  as  5  min after stimulation and independently of de novo protein synthesis.  Indeed,  freshly  isolated  PMNs  contain  these  mediators  as assessed  in  protein  lysates.  These  results  suggest  that  pro-  and antiangiogenic factors are preformed and rapidly released upon activation. We also found that hGV stimulation does not increase VEGF-A Ang1 , , and VEGF-A165b mRNA levels (data not shown), indicating that hGV preferentially acts by modulating the release of these factors rather than by acting at the level of transcription or alternative splicing. The signals responsible for the constitutive expression of angiogenic mediators, in particular VEGF-A165b, in

PMNs are not known. VEGF-A is stored almost exclusively in the specific ( β ) granules (49), by contrast, Ang1 is predominantly located in the cytosolic fraction (50). Further studies are needed to understand the molecular details of VEGF-A165b expression in resting and hGV-stimulated PMNs.

We also demonstrate that the hGV enzymatic activity and/or its binding to PLA2R1 as well as HSPGs are required for VEGF-A, Ang1, and CXCL8/IL-8 but not for VEGF-A165b release that conversely requires the interaction of hGV with the integrins α β V 3 and α β 4 1 . The hGV-activated signaling pathways downstream of integrins required for VEGF-A165b release have yet to be defined. fMLF induces the release of endogenous hGV that modulate the secretion of VEGF-A and CXCL8/IL-8 but not of VEGF-A165b, likely because of the low level of endogenous hGV , insufficient to drive VEGF-A165b secretion. Nevertheless, we cannot exclude that in situations of high density of PMNs (e.g., in the context of  acute  inflammation),  the  concentrations  of  hGV  may  reach the minimum required to stimulate VEGF-A165b release, possibly driving a switch toward antiangiogenic properties of PMNs.

To evaluate the in vivo relevance of our findings, we assessed the expression of hGV and CD66b (a marker of neutrophils) in human lung cancer and found a higher expression of hGV in neutrophilinfiltrated tumor lung tissue compared to non-tumor lung samples. These results suggest that PMNs may be activated by hGV in the context  of  lung  cancer.  Whether  this  interaction  results  in  the release  of  proangiogenic  and/or  antiangiogenic  factors  has  still to be determined. Since VEGF-A165b restrains tumor growth and progression in several experimental models, our results support the exploration of the hGV-neutrophil axis in human lung cancer.

## eThics sTaTeMenT

The study protocol involving the use of human blood cells was approved by the Ethical Committee of the University of Naples Federico  II,  and  written  informed  consent  was  obtained  from blood donors undergoing thoracic surgery in according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki.

## aUThOr cOnTriBUTiOns

Substantial  contributions  to  the  conception  or  design  of  the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work; drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content; final approval of the version to be published; and agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved: SL, FB, RI, AF, MG, VG, PE, GV, GL, MC, FG, and GM.

## FUnDing

This work was supported by grants from the Regione Campania CISI-Lab Project, CRèME Project, and TIMING Project (to GM).

## sUPPleMenTarY MaTerial

The  Supplementary  Material  for  this  article  can  be  found online at http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fimmu. 2017.00443/full#supplementary-material.

## reFerences

- 1. Murakami M, Lambeau G. Emerging roles of secreted phospholipase A(2) enzymes: an update. Biochimie (2013) 95:43-50. doi:10.1016/j.biochi. 2012.09.007
- 2. Bernard D, Vindrieux D. PLA2R1: expression and function in cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta (2014) 1846:40-4. doi:10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.03.003
- 3. Fujita M, Zhu K, Fujita CK, Zhao M, Lam KS, Kurth MJ, et al. Proinflammatory secreted phospholipase A2 type IIA (sPLA-IIA) induces integrin activation through direct binding to a newly identified binding site (site 2) in integrins alphavbeta3, alpha4beta1, and alpha5beta1. J Biol Chem (2015) 290:259-71. doi:10.1074/jbc.M114.579946
- 4. Lambeau G, Ancian P, Barhanin J, Lazdunski M. Cloning and expression of a  membrane receptor for secretory phospholipases A2. J Biol  Chem (1994) 269:1575-8.
- 5. Lambeau G, Gelb MH. Biochemistry and physiology of mammalian secreted phospholipases  A2. Annu  Rev  Biochem (2008)  77:495-520.  doi:10.1146/ annurev.biochem.76.062405.154007
- 6. Lambeau  G,  Lazdunski  M.  Receptors  for  a  growing  family  of  secreted phospholipases  A2. Trends  Pharmacol  Sci (1999)  20:162-70.  doi:10.1016/ S0165-6147(99)01300-0
- 7. Saegusa  J,  Akakura  N,  Wu  CY,  Hoogland  C,  Ma  Z,  Lam  KS,  et  al.  Proinflammatory  secretory  phospholipase  A2  type  IIA  binds  to  integrins alphavbeta3 and alpha4beta1 and induces proliferation of monocytic cells  in  an  integrin-dependent  manner. J Biol  Chem (2008)  283:26107-15. doi:10.1074/jbc.M804835200
- 8. Kim KP, Rafter JD, Bittova L, Han SK, Snitko Y, Munoz NM, et al. Mechanism of  human group V phospholipase A2 (PLA2)-induced leukotriene biosynthesis in human neutrophils. A potential role of heparan sulfate binding in PLA2  internalization  and  degradation. J Biol  Chem (2001)  276:11126-34. doi:10.1074/jbc.M004604200
- 9. Boilard E, Bourgoin SG, Bernatchez C, Poubelle PE, Surette ME. Interaction of low molecular weight group IIA phospholipase A2 with apoptotic human T cells:  role  of  heparan  sulfate  proteoglycans. FASEB J (2003)  17:1068-80. doi:10.1096/fj.02-0938com
- 10. Murakami M, Taketomi Y, Miki Y, Sato H, Hirabayashi T, Yamamoto K, et al. Recent  progress  in  phospholipase  A(2)  research:  from  cells  to  animals  to humans. Prog Lipid Res (2011) 50:152-92. doi:10.1016/j.plipres.2010.12.001
- 11. Dennis  EA,  Cao  J,  Hsu  YH,  Magrioti  V ,  Kokotos  G.  Phospholipase  A2 enzymes: physical structure, biological function, disease implication, chemical inhibition, and therapeutic intervention. Chem Rev (2011) 111:6130-85. doi:10.1021/cr200085w
- 12. Menschikowski  M,  Hagelgans  A,  Nacke  B,  Jandeck  C,  Mareninova  OA, Asatryan L, et al. Epigenetic control of group V phospholipase A2 expression in  human  malignant  cells. Tumour  Biol (2016)  37:8097-105.  doi:10.1007/ s13277-015-4670-x
- 13. Brglez V , Lambeau G, Petan T. Secreted phospholipases A2 in cancer: diverse mechanisms  of  action. Biochimie (2014)  107(Pt  A):114-23.  doi:10.1016/j. biochi.2014.09.023
- 14. Laye  JP ,  Gill  JH.  Phospholipase  A2  expression  in  tumours:  a  target  for therapeutic  intervention? Drug  Discov  Today (2003)  8:710-6.  doi:10.1016/ S1359-6446(03)02754-5
- 15. Scott KF, Sajinovic M, Hein J, Nixdorf S, Galettis P , Liauw W , et al. Emerging roles for phospholipase A2 enzymes in cancer. Biochimie (2010) 92:601-10. doi:10.1016/j.biochi.2010.03.019
- 16. Degousee N, Ghomashchi F, Stefanski E, Singer A, Smart BP, Borregaard N, et al. Groups IV , V , and X phospholipases A2s in human neutrophils: role in eicosanoid production and gram-negative bacterial phospholipid hydrolysis. J Biol Chem (2002) 277:5061-73. doi:10.1074/jbc.M109083200
- 17. Granata F, Frattini A, Loffredo S, Del Prete A, Sozzani S, Marone G, et al. Signaling  events  involved  in  cytokine  and  chemokine  production  induced by secretory phospholipase A2 in human lung macrophages. Eur J Immunol (2006) 36:1938-50. doi:10.1002/eji.200535567
- 18. Granata  F,  Frattini  A,  Loffredo  S,  Staiano  RI,  Petraroli  A,  Ribatti  D,  et  al. Production  of  vascular  endothelial  growth  factors  from  human  lung  macrophages  induced  by  group  IIA  and  group  X  secreted  phospholipases  A2. J Immunol (2010) 184:5232-41. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.0902501

- 19. Solodkin-Szaingurten I, Levy R, Hadad N. Differential behavior of sPLA2-V and  sPLA2-X  in  human  neutrophils. Biochim  Biophys  Acta (2007)  1771: 155-63. doi:10.1016/j.bbalip.2006.11.013
- 20. Triggiani M, Giannattasio G, Calabrese C, Loffredo S, Granata F, Fiorello A, et al. Lung mast cells are a source of secreted phospholipases A2. J Allergy Clin Immunol (2009) 124:558-65, 565.e1-3. doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2009.04.035
- 21. Triggiani M, Granata F, Frattini A, Marone G. Activation of human inflammatory  cells  by  secreted  phospholipases  A2. Biochim  Biophys  Acta (2006) 1761:1289-300. doi:10.1016/j.bbalip.2006.07.003
- 22. Jo EJ, Lee HY, Lee YN, Kim JI, Kang HK, Park DW , et al. Group IB secretory phospholipase A2 stimulates CXC chemokine ligand 8 production via ERK and  NF-kappa  B  in  human  neutrophils. J Immunol (2004)  173:6433-9. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.173.10.6433
- 23. Silliman  CC,  Moore  EE,  Zallen  G,  Gonzalez  R,  Johnson  JL,  Elzi  DJ,  et  al. Presence  of  the  M-type  sPLA(2)  receptor  on  neutrophils  and  its  role  in elastase release and adhesion. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2002) 283:C1102-13. doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00608.2001
- 24. Mantovani  A,  Cassatella  MA,  Costantini  C,  Jaillon  S.  Neutrophils  in  the activation and regulation of innate and adaptive immunity. Nat Rev Immunol (2011) 11:519-31. doi:10.1038/nri3024
- 25. Fridlender ZG, Sun J, Kim S, Kapoor V , Cheng G, Ling L, et al. Polarization of tumor-associated neutrophil phenotype by TGF-beta: 'N1' versus 'N2' TAN. Cancer Cell (2009) 16:183-94. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2009.06.017
- 26. Mantovani  A.  The  yin-yang  of  tumor-associated  neutrophils. Cancer  Cell (2009) 16:173-4. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2009.08.014
- 27. Donskov  F.  Immunomonitoring  and  prognostic  relevance  of  neutrophils in clinical trials. Semin Cancer Biol (2013) 23:200-7. doi:10.1016/j. semcancer.2013.02.001
- 28. Galdiero  MR,  Bianchi  P ,  Grizzi  F,  Di  Caro  G,  Basso  G,  Ponzetta  A,  et  al. Occurrence  and  significance  of  tumor-associated  neutrophils  in  patients with colorectal cancer. Int J Cancer (2016) 139:446-56. doi:10.1002/ ijc.30076
- 29. Jensen HK, Donskov F, Marcussen N, Nordsmark M, Lundbeck F, von der Maase H. Presence of intratumoral neutrophils is an independent prognostic factor  in  localized  renal  cell  carcinoma. J Clin  Oncol (2009)  27:4709-17. doi:10.1200/JCO.2008.18.9498
- 30. Kuang DM, Zhao Q, Wu Y, Peng C, Wang J, Xu Z, et al. Peritumoral neutrophils link inflammatory response to disease progression by fostering angiogenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol (2011)  54:948-55.  doi:10.1016/j. jhep.2010.08.041
- 31. Rao HL, Chen JW, Li M, Xiao YB, Fu J, Zeng YX, et al. Increased intratumoral neutrophil  in  colorectal  carcinomas  correlates  closely  with  malignant  phenotype and predicts patients' adverse prognosis. PLoS One (2012) 7:e30806. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030806
- 32. Trellakis S, Bruderek K, Dumitru CA, Gholaman H, Gu X, Bankfalvi A, et al. Polymorphonuclear granulocytes in human head and neck cancer: enhanced inflammatory activity, modulation by cancer cells and expansion in advanced disease. Int J Cancer (2011) 129:2183-93. doi:10.1002/ijc.25892
- 33. Wislez  M,  Rabbe  N,  Marchal  J,  Milleron  B,  Crestani  B,  Mayaud  C,  et  al. Hepatocyte growth factor production by neutrophils infiltrating bronchioloalveolar subtype pulmonary adenocarcinoma: role in tumor progression and death. Cancer Res (2003) 63:1405-12.
- 34. Eruslanov EB, Bhojnagarwala PS, Quatromoni JG, Stephen TL, Ranganathan  A,  Deshpande  C,  et  al.  Tumor-associated  neutrophils  stimulate  T  cell  responses  in  early-stage  human lung cancer. J Clin  Invest (2014) 124:5466-80. doi:10.1172/JCI77053
- 35. Saha  S,  Biswas  SK.  Tumor-associated  neutrophils  show  phenotypic  and functional  divergence  in  human  lung  cancer. Cancer  Cell (2016)  30:11-3. doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2016.06.016
- 36. Tecchio C, Cassatella MA.  Neutrophil-derived cytokines involved in physiological and pathological angiogenesis. Chem Immunol Allergy (2014) 99:123-37. doi:10.1159/000353358
- 37. Marone G, Granata F. Angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis and clinical implications.  preface. Chem Immunol  Allergy (2014)  99:XI-XII.  doi:10.1159/000352074
- 38. Stacker  SA,  Williams  SP ,  Karnezis  T,  Shayan  R,  Fox  SB,  Achen  MG,  et  al. Lymphangiogenesis  and  lymphatic  vessel  remodelling  in  cancer. Nat  Rev Cancer (2014) 14:159-72. doi:10.1038/nrc3677

- 39. Carmeliet P. Angiogenesis in health and disease. Nat Med (2003) 9:653-60. doi:10.1038/nm0603-653
- 40. Ferrara N, Gerber HP, LeCouter J. The biology of VEGF and its receptors. Nat Med (2003) 9:669-76. doi:10.1038/nm0603-669
- 41. Olofsson B, Pajusola K, Kaipainen A, von Euler G, Joukov V , Saksela O, et al. Vascular endothelial growth factor B, a novel growth factor for endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996) 93:2576-81. doi:10.1073/pnas.93.6.2576
- 42. Bates DO, Cui TG, Doughty JM, Winkler M, Sugiono M, Shields JD, et al. VEGF165b, an inhibitory splice variant of vascular endothelial growth factor, is down-regulated in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Res (2002) 62:4123-31.
- 43. Bates DO, Mavrou A, Qiu Y, Carter JG, Hamdollah-Zadeh M, Barratt S, et al. Detection  of  VEGF-A(xxx)b  isoforms  in  human  tissues. PLoS  One (2013) 8:e68399. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068399
- 44. Harper SJ, Bates DO. VEGF-A splicing: the key to anti-angiogenic therapeutics? Nat Rev Cancer (2008) 8:880-7. doi:10.1038/nrc2505
- 45. Davis S, Aldrich TH, Jones PF, Acheson A, Compton DL, Jain V , et al. Isolation of angiopoietin-1, a ligand for the TIE2 receptor, by secretion-trap expression cloning. Cell (1996) 87:1161-9. doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81812-7
- 46. Maisonpierre PC, Suri C, Jones PF, Bartunkova S, Wiegand SJ, Radziejewski C, et al. Angiopoietin-2, a natural antagonist for Tie2 that disrupts in vivo angiogenesis. Science (1997) 277:55-60. doi:10.1126/science.277.5322.55
- 47. Marone  G,  Varricchi  G,  Loffredo  S,  Granata  F.  Mast  cells  and  basophils in inflammatory  and  tumor  angiogenesis  and  lymphangiogenesis. Eur J Pharmacol (2015) 778:146-51. doi:10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.03.088
- 48. Loffredo S, Staiano RI, Granata F, Genovese A, Marone G. Immune cells as a source and target of angiogenic and lymphangiogenic factors. Chem Immunol Allergy (2014) 99:15-36. doi:10.1159/000353316
- 49. Gaudry  M,  Brégerie  O,  Andrieu  V ,  El  Benna  J,  Pocidalo  MA,  Hakim  J. Intracellular pool of vascular endothelial growth factor in human neutrophils. Blood (1997) 90:4153-61.
- 50. Neagoe PE, Brkovic A, Hajjar F, Sirois MG. Expression and release of angiopoietin-1 from human neutrophils: intracellular mechanisms. Growth Factors (2009) 27:335-44. doi:10.3109/08977190903155043
- 51. Tecchio C, Scapini P , Pizzolo G, Cassatella MA. On the cytokines produced by  human  neutrophils  in  tumors. Semin  Cancer  Biol (2013)  23:159-70. doi:10.1016/j.semcancer.2013.02.004
- 52. Boilard E, Rouault M, Surrel F, Le Calvez C, Bezzine S, Singer A, et al. Secreted phospholipase A2 inhibitors are also potent blockers of binding to the M-type receptor. Biochemistry (2006) 45:13203-18. doi:10.1021/bi061376d
- 53. Granata  F,  Petraroli  A,  Boilard  E,  Bezzine  S,  Bollinger  J,  Del  Vecchio  L, et  al.  Activation  of  cytokine  production  by  secreted  phospholipase  A2  in human lung macrophages expressing the M-type receptor. J Immunol (2005) 174:464-74.
- 54. Johnston  B,  Kubes  P . The  alpha4-integrin:  an  alternative pathway  for neutrophil  recruitment? Immunol  Today (1999)  20:545-50.  doi:10.1016/ S0167-5699(99)01544-3
- 55. Lawson MA, Maxfield FR. Ca(2 + )- and calcineurin-dependent recycling of an  integrin  to  the  front  of  migrating  neutrophils. Nature (1995)  377:75-9. doi:10.1038/377075a0
- 56. Cho W. Structure, function, and regulation of group V phospholipase A(2). Biochim Biophys Acta (2000) 1488:48-58. doi:10.1016/S1388-1981(00)00109-8

- 57. Choi Y, Kim E, Lee Y, Han MH, Kang IC. Site-specific inhibition of integrin alpha  v  beta  3-vitronectin  association  by  a  ser-asp-val  sequence  through an  Arg-Gly-Asp-binding  site  of  the  integrin. Proteomics (2010)  10:72-80. doi:10.1002/pmic.200900146
- 58. Muro F, Iimura S, Sugimoto Y, Yoneda Y, Chiba J, Watanabe T, et al. Discovery of trans-4-[1-[[2,5-dichloro-4-(1-methyl-3-indolylcarboxamido)phenyl]acetyl](4S)-methoxy-(2S)-pyrrolidinylmethoxy]cyclohexanecarboxylic acid: an orally  active,  selective  very  late  antigen-4  antagonist. J Med  Chem (2009) 52:7974-92. doi:10.1021/jm901154c
- 59. Oslund  RC,  Cermak  N,  Gelb  MH.  Highly  specific  and  broadly  potent inhibitors  of  mammalian  secreted  phospholipases  A2. J Med  Chem (2008) 51:4708-14. doi:10.1021/jm800422v
- 60. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer:  the  next  generation. Cell (2011) 144:646-74. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013
- 61. Galdiero MR, Garlanda C, Jaillon S, Marone G, Mantovani A. Tumor associated macrophages and neutrophils in tumor progression. J Cell Physiol (2013) 228:1404-12. doi:10.1002/jcp.24260
- 62. de Paulis A, Prevete N, Fiorentino I, Rossi FW , Staibano S, Montuori N, et al. Expression and functions of the vascular endothelial growth factors and their receptors in human basophils. J Immunol (2006) 177:7322-31. doi:10.4049/ jimmunol.177.10.7322
- 63. Manetti  M,  Guiducci  S,  Ibba-Manneschi  L,  Matucci-Cerinic  M.  Impaired angiogenesis in systemic sclerosis:  the  emerging  role  of  the  antiangiogenic VEGF(165)b  splice  variant. Trends Cardiovasc Med (2011) 21:204-10. doi:10.1016/j.tcm.2012.05.011
- 64. Manetti  M,  Guiducci  S,  Romano  E,  Ceccarelli  C,  Bellando-Randone  S, Conforti ML, et al. Overexpression of VEGF165b, an inhibitory splice variant of  vascular  endothelial  growth  factor,  leads  to  insufficient  angiogenesis  in patients  with  systemic  sclerosis. Circ  Res (2011)  109:e14-26.  doi:10.1161/ CIRCRESAHA.111.242057
- 65. Kikuchi R, Nakamura K, MacLauchlan S, Ngo DT, Shimizu I, Fuster JJ, et al. An antiangiogenic isoform of VEGF-A contributes to impaired vascularization in peripheral artery disease. Nat Med (2014) 20:1464-71. doi:10.1038/ nm.3703
- 66. Rennel ES, Hamdollah-Zadeh MA, Wheatley ER, Magnussen A, Schüler Y, Kelly  SP ,  et  al.  Recombinant  human  VEGF165b  protein  is  an  effective anti-cancer  agent  in  mice. Eur  J Cancer (2008)  44:1883-94.  doi:10.1016/ j.ejca.2008.05.027

Conflict of Interest Statement: The  authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Copyright  ©  2017  Loffredo,  Borriello,  Iannone,  Ferrara,  Galdiero,  Gigantino, Esposito,  Varricchi,  Lambeau,  Cassatella,  Granata  and  Marone.  This  is  an  openaccess  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,  provided  the  original  author(s)  or  licensor  are  credited  and  that  the  original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.