<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## OPEN ACCESS

EDITED BY Anshu Agrawal, University of California, Irvine, United States

REVIEWED BY Luca Soraci, IRCCS INRCA, Italy H. Denis Alexander, Ulster University, United Kingdom

## *CORRESPONDENCE

Calogero Caruso, calogero.caruso@unipa.it Giuseppina Candore, giuseppina.candore@unipa.it

RECEIVED 03 August 2023 ACCEPTED 13 November 2023

PUBLISHED 28 November 2023

## CITATION

Calabrò A, Accardi G, Aiello A, Caruso C and Candore G (2023), Sex and gender affect immune aging. Front. Aging 4:1272118. doi: 10.3389/fragi.2023.1272118

## COPYRIGHT

© 2023 Calabrò, Accardi, Aiello, Caruso and Candore. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

## Sex and gender affect immune aging

Anna Calabrò, Giulia Accardi, Anna Aiello, Calogero Caruso* and Giuseppina Candore*

Laboratory of Immunopathology and Immunosenescence, Department of Biomedicine, Neurosciences and Advanced Diagnostics, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy

The proposed review aims to elucidate the intricate interplay between biological factors (sex differences) and socially constructed factors (gender differences) in the context of immune aging. While the in /uniFB02 uence of biological differences between men and women on various aspects of immune responses has long been recognized, it is crucial to acknowledge that gender, encompassing the social and cultural roles and expectations associated with being male or female, also signi /uniFB01 cantly shapes these processes. Gender can either accelerate immune aging or promote longevity. By recognizing the impact of both biological and social factors, this work seeks to offer a comprehensive understanding of why men and women may experience divergent trajectories in immune aging and varying outcomes in terms of longevity. Discrepancies in perceived roles of the sexes, both within families and at work, contribute to differing patterns of antigen exposure. Additionally, variations in micronutrient intake and access to preventive healthcare facilities may exist. Health promotion knowledge often correlates with educational attainment, which is unequally represented between males and females in many cultures and across generations in the Western world. In countries without a universal healthcare system, access to healthcare relies on family prioritization strategies to cope with economic constraints, potentially limiting access to speci /uniFB01 c treatments and affecting immune responses negatively. As a result, both biological factors and social and behavioral factors associated with gender contribute to disparities in immune responses, susceptibility to infections, autoimmune diseases, and vaccine responses among older individuals. However, as demonstrated by the COVID-19 pandemic, older females exhibit greater resilience to infections than older males. Given the crucial role of the immune system in achieving longevity, it is not surprising that women live longer than men, and the number of female centenarians surpasses that of male centenarians.

KEYWORDS

aging, COVID-19, gender, immune aging, longevity, sex

## 1 Introduction

Starting from the sixth decade of life, the human immune system undergoes signi /uniFB01 cant age-related changes that progressively lead to a state known as immunosenescence (Weyand and Goronzy, 2016). This is a complex process where some immune functions decline sharply with age, while others are maintained or even increase to varying degrees among different individuals. The most appropriate term to describe this phenomenon should be ' immune aging. ' Immunosenescence is characterized by several hallmarks, which include a reduced capacity to respond to new antigens and vaccinations, primarily due to a decrease in

naive T and B lymphocytes. Additionally, there is an accumulation of memory cells and the presence of low-grade chronic in /uniFB02 ammation, referred to as in /uniFB02 ammaging (Moskalev et al., 2020). Factors such as trained immunity and immunobiography (Caruso et al., 2022), in /uniFB02 uenced by environmental and social factors (Franceschi et al., 2017; Ochando et al., 2023), can modulate the process of immunosenescence. Differences in exposure to pathogenic agents prepare the immune system to respond to future challenges. Innate immune cells adapt themselves to both endogenous and exogenous challenges through training and can undergo epigenetic and transcriptomic modi /uniFB01 cations. By contrast, adaptive immunity is shaped through genetic reprogramming and epigenetic modi /uniFB01 cations, allowing adults to mount responses to known challenges, such as bacteria or viruses, in a manner that varies on the basis of their previous exposure and individual immune characteristics (Caruso et al., 2022). Furthermore, latent chronic viral infections, like human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection, are considered potent triggers of immunosenescence hallmarks, as they lead to an increase in memory cells (Aiello et al., 2019).

In older individuals, alterations in immunity manifest differently between women and men. It is essential to take into account the in /uniFB02 uence of the socioeconomic environment on human health and immune responses and assess the contribution of a complex interplay of factors that are challenging to disentangle, potentially encompassing gender-related aspects. Nonetheless, the variability in the immune system between the sexes as individuals age has a signi /uniFB01 cant impact on their ability to combat age-related diseases and respond to anti-aging strategies. This, in turn, can result in a reduction in both health span and lifespan (Caruso et al., 2022).

These factors contribute to the possibility of achieving advanced ages in good health. Regarding this, a study examining the mortality rates in 37 countries worldwide revealed that since the 1800s and continuing to the present day, women have consistently had a greater life expectancy at birth than men (Human Mortality Database, 2023). Moreover, women experience lower age-adjusted mortality rates than men across a wide spectrum of diseases. For example, in the United States in 2010, women had lower mortality rates than men for 12 out of the top 15 causes of death, with higher mortality rates only in the case of Alzheimer s disease (Rogers et al., ' 2010). In Western countries, life expectancy in women is, in fact, 5.6 years longer than that in men (Moskalev et al., 2020). In addition to the disparities in longevity between women and men, it is intriguing to examine the health conditions under which extreme ages are reached. In this context, the health-survival paradox (Archer et al., 2018) suggests that while females live longer than males, they exhibit a higher incidence of age-related diseases and certain immunopathological infections, such as measles and dengue, but not coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) (Austad and Bartke, 2015; Caruso et al., 2023a). One possible explanation for the healthsurvival paradox may stem from the fact that centenarian men are fewer in number when compared to women and may represent a more select group with better overall health. Meanwhile, women live longer but may be more susceptible to frailty conditions.

Understanding immune aging is a crucial endeavor aimed at explaining the differing health statuses of older women when compared to men. The disparity between the two genders cannot be solely attributed to phenotypical changes in immune cells or the

observed functional alterations associated with immunosenescence. Various other factors come into play. For instance, hormone decline characterizes women during menopause and signi /uniFB01 cantly in /uniFB02 uences the immune system. Genetic factors, the rate of mutations with aging, or epigenetic modi /uniFB01 cations can also impact immune cell functionality. Interestingly, studies suggest fewer changes in genetic mutations and chromosome alterations in women than in men (Bronikowski et al., 2022). Furthermore, social factors such as occupation, economic conditions, education, and nutritional habits play a role in shaping the immune system as individuals age. Therefore, it is possible to identify differences in immune system functionality based on age and sex. However, when considering an individual s ' entire life, a complex interplay of factors contributes to gender differences between the two sexes. This review aims to explore the boundary between the contributions of sex and gender in de /uniFB01 ning the immune system as it ages.

To conduct this narrative review on sex and gender differences in the immune aging process, the PubMed database was utilized. The search was initiated using keywords such as sex, gender, sex differences, and sexual dimorphism. The primary aim of this study was to explore the distinctions between the terms sex and gender in scienti /uniFB01 c literature and emphasize their speci /uniFB01 c use in characterizing biological and socioeconomic factors, allowing for a distinct approach to the immune aging process. In the initial phase of the research, studies encompassing a span of 30 years of published literature (1993 -2023) were considered. From the extensive pool of works from 1993 to today, a selection was made, focusing on original articles, reviews, multicenter studies, and comparative studies, while excluding the overwhelming majority of studies involving animals or a limited number of individuals. Studies with sex strati /uniFB01 cation were included for analysis. Interestingly, no studies were found about the in /uniFB02 uence of gender on the immune aging process. This discrepancy may be attributed to the interchangeable use of both terms, sex and gender, despite their distinct meanings. Furthermore, when searching for the concept of trained immunity, which could be related to gender in /uniFB02 uence, only one article emerged, albeit unrelated to the subject matter of this review. The full list of the keywords employed in the study is reported in Figure 1. Additionally, articles were selected based on their citations or similarity of content. The central question addressed in this review revolves around the signi /uniFB01 cance of incorporating gender considerations in the assessment of immunological aging, supplementing traditional sex strati /uniFB01 cation.

## 2 De /uniFB01 nition of sex and gender

The biological de /uniFB01 nition of sex is primarily based on genetics and hormones. In humans, sex is determined by the presence of speci /uniFB01 c sex chromosomes, which distinguish between the homogametic (XX) and heterogametic (XY) sexes. More speci /uniFB01 cally, the presence of the Y chromosome in males, which contains a DNA region known as the sex-determining region of Y (SRY), is what de /uniFB01 nes the male sex. This gene encodes the SRY factor, also known as the testis determining factor, which serves as a transcriptional factor. Its role is to promote the formation of male gonads. Conversely, the absence of this gene, due to the lack of a Y chromosome, leads to the development of female gonads (Berta et al., 1990; Russell, 2013).

Sex, gender; sex differences, sexual dimorphism

Human aging, aging, geriatrics; longevity

Immunosenescence; immunomodulation, inflamm-aging, inflammation; inflammation parameters, microbiome

COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, infectious diseases; vaccines

Centenarians, supercentenarians, trained immunity

## FIGURE 1

List of keywords used in the PubMed search. The /uniFB01 rst three boxes only represent the temporal progression of the work /uniFB02 ow since, for example, bibliographic entries about the difference between sex and gender are already evident from the /uniFB01 rst box. The remaining two boxes contain collateral keywords that cannot be included in the work /uniFB02 ow.

TABLE 1 Sex-related immune alterations linked to sexual chromosomes. Description of the main in /uniFB02 uences of sexual chromosomes on immune responses with aging.

| Factors in /uniFB02 uencing immune aging                 | Immune effects                                                                                                                         | References                                                                     |
|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| X-linked genes                                           | Greater cytokine release in women than in men                                                                                          | Dodd and Menon (2022); Oertelt-Prigione (2012)                                 |
| X-linked genes                                           | Worst response to respiratory syncytial virus in men                                                                                   | Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al. (2015); Klein et al. (2010); Oghumu et al. (2019) |
| Incomplete or variable dose compensation of X chromosome | Higher adaptive responses in women                                                                                                     | Casimir and Duchateau (2011); Dodd and Menon (2022); Jaillon et al. (2019)     |
| Incomplete or variable dose compensation of X chromosome | Greater in /uniFB02 ammatory responses in women                                                                                        | Casimir and Duchateau (2011); Dodd and Menon (2022); Jaillon et al. (2019)     |
| Incomplete or variable dose compensation of X chromosome | Higher incidence of autoimmune disease in women                                                                                        | Flanagan (2014); Sun et al. (2022)                                             |
| Incomplete or variable dose compensation of X chromosome | Altered expression of miRNA genes                                                                                                      | Di Palo et al. (2020); Sharma and Eghbali (2014)                               |
| Y-linked genes                                           | Faster development of AIDS because of resistance to anti-retroviral therapy due to haplogroup I                                        | Charchar et al. (2012); Maan et al. (2017)                                     |
| Y-linked genes                                           | Higher in /uniFB02 ammatory response and cardiovascular disease risk due to in /uniFB02 ammation-related genes related to haplogroup I | Charchar et al. (2012)                                                         |
| Y-linked genes                                           | Higher risk of atherosclerotic plaque formation due to haplogroup I                                                                    | Maan et al. (2017)                                                             |
| Y-linked genes                                           | Y-linked genetic autoimmune-based origin for multiple sclerosis in men                                                                 | Maan et al. (2017)                                                             |

TABLE 2 Sex-related immune alterations linked to hormonal factors. Brief description of the main evidence regarding the effects of hormones on immune aging.TABLE 3 Gender-related variables in /uniFB02 uencing the immune aging. Brief description of the main evidence regarding the effects of gender-related variables on immune aging.

| Factors in /uniFB02 uencing immune aging   | Immune effects                                                                             | References                                                                      |
|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Estrogen                                   | Tolerogenic conditions and higher incidence of infections during pregnancy                 | Carrega and Ferlazzo (2012); Fuhler (2020)                                      |
|                                            | Higher immune response in women                                                            | Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al. (2015)                                             |
|                                            | Epigenetic changes and modulation of immune responses                                      | Patin et al. (2018); Thompson et al. (2018)                                     |
|                                            | Stimulation of Th2 responses and activation of antibody production                         | Asaba et al. (2015); Dodd and Menon (2022); Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al. (2015) |
|                                            | Modulation of B cells and production of autoreactive cells                                 | Asaba et al. (2015); Dodd and Menon (2022); Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al. (2015) |
| Androgens                                  | Immunosuppression in men                                                                   | Klein et al. (2010); Henze et al. (2020)                                        |
| Progesterone                               | Induction of higher susceptibility to Spanish /uniFB02 u in women                          | Restifo (2000)                                                                  |
|                                            | Higher infection incidence in men                                                          | Austad and Bartke (2015); Gay et al. (2021)                                     |
|                                            | Autoimmune disease remission due to the increase of Th2 response and of regulatory T cells | Desai and Brinton (2019); Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al. (2015); McCarthy (2000)  |
| Prolactin                                  | Higher incidence of autoimmune diseases, such as SLE and induction of estrogen release     | Lahita (2023)                                                                   |
| Oral contraceptives                        | Faster progression of HIV infections                                                       | Addo and Altfel (2014); Oertelt-Prigione (2012)                                 |

| Gender-related variable                                      | Institutionalized gender-related differences                                                                                               | Effects                                                                                                                                                                                | References                                                               |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Different exposure to immunological triggers                 | Different rates and types of infections                                                                                                    | Different immunization rates toward pathogens, varying abilities to respond to new infections through trained immunity, and distinct immunobiographies                                 | Franceschi et al. (2017); Ochando et al. (2023); Oertelt-Prigione (2012) |
| Differences in resource prioritization (food, healthcare)    | Women are more likely to forget food and healthcare assistance in cases of economic distress                                               | Undernutrition or malnutrition affects the immune ability to respond to infections and overall immune system modulation                                                                | Tieu et al. (2022)                                                       |
| Differences in perception and approach to health and disease | The rate of diagnosis and care varies between women and men depending on the world region and the level of economic and social development | Women have a higher incidence of certain immune diseases and infection diagnoses due to a greater rate of diagnosis and a longer lifespan in the older population of the Western world | Alcade-Rubio et al. (2020); Oertelt-Prigione (2012)                      |

In the animal kingdom, the genetic de /uniFB01 nition of sex, which relies on sexual chromosomes, often reveals that the heterogametic sex has a shorter lifespan than the homogametic sex. This difference in lifespan may stem from the expression of deleterious mutations on the sex chromosome responsible for determining the sex (Xirocostas et al., 2020). However, in the case of humans, this relationship has not been de /uniFB01 nitively con /uniFB01 rmed. Observations of individuals with two Y chromosomes (XYY) suggest a reduction in lifespan by approximately 10 years, while individuals with an extra X chromosome (XXY) show a reduction of around 2 years (Bronikowski et al., 2022). It is worth noting that in some species, the silencing of one chromosome in the homogametic sex, as part of a dose compensation process, seems to have a negative impact on longevity (Bronikowski et al., 2022). Therefore, based solely on the in /uniFB02 uence of sexual chromosomes, males appear to have a disadvantage when compared to females in terms of achieving a longer lifespan.

The biological determination of sex also involves hormone production, which plays a crucial role in in /uniFB02 uencing the

development of various characteristics related to biological sex. These characteristics encompass a wide range, such as body features, bone structure, and hair distribution. Two primary types of sex hormones are essential for shaping these characteristics: androgens and estrogens. All individuals, regardless of their biological sex, have certain levels of both hormones in their bodies. However, the extent to which a person develops male or female traits is contingent upon the quantity of each hormone they possess (Hiller-Sturmhöfel and Bartke, 1998).

In the /uniFB01 eld of health science, the terms ' gender ' and ' sex ' are often used interchangeably. However, it is important to note that the concept of gender encompasses a broader spectrum, including identities, expressions, roles, norms, behaviors, and perceptions associated with men and women. These aspects can differ signi /uniFB01 cantly from the traditionally de /uniFB01 ned biological sexes. Therefore, gender is closely tied to social, relational, and occupational behaviors, as well as environmental exposures that may impact women differently than men. These factors can also play a role in in /uniFB02 uencing immune responses. The introduction of gender

<!-- image -->

categorization assumes importance in understanding the development of chronic diseases that cannot be fully explained by biological factors alone. Indeed, mounting evidence suggests that both sex and gender independently in /uniFB02 uence the progression

of diseases. Gender medicine is a relatively new and multidisciplinary /uniFB01 eld that holds signi /uniFB01 cant promise for clinical studies in the 21st century (Baggio et al., 2013). Over the past 25 years, numerous studies have provided evidence of the ' gender '

effect, which encompasses differences in the clinical presentation of diseases, access to therapies, and responses to treatments based on gender. Despite this, integrating the concept of gender into healthcare practice remains a challenge due to the lack of standardized criteria for de /uniFB01 ning gender. This variation stems from differences in cultures, politics, and the organization of social and healthcare systems. Moreover, the concept of gender extends to how resources are distributed between women and men, particularly in the realms of politics, society, and education.

Recently, a consortium has been established to investigate the role of gender at the onset and in the outcome of cardiovascular diseases in young people. It challenges the traditional assumption that women are more prone to experience cardiac events within a year of their /uniFB01 rst cardiovascular disease manifestation, which suggests a higher incidence of recurrent disease manifestation (Raparelli et al., 2021; Gisinger et al., 2023). De ning /uniFB01 the risk and incidence of cardiovascular diseases based on both sex and gender introduces a complex perspective. While women are less affected by conditions such as heart failure and cardiovascular obstructive diseases, their outcomes are adversely in /uniFB02 uenced by gender-related factors. In reality, the incidence of these diseases is lower in the femaleidenti /uniFB01 ed gender, but it leads to worse prognosis and outcomes. This can be attributed to gender-related issues, such as a smaller number of women in clinical trials for cardioprotective drugs and therapies, limited dissemination of data speci /uniFB01 c to women, a greater psychological impact of these diseases on women, and less emphasis on prevention (Regitz-Zagrosek and Gebhard, 2023). The consortium has also established a set of standardized parameters to consider, which can be retrospectively applied to previous studies. In this context, the concept of gender identi /uniFB01 cation is expanding beyond the traditional binary classi /uniFB01 cation of women and men to include individuals who identify as intersex (Gisinger et al., 2023). Naturally, the evaluation and description of gender evolve with cultural progress and when comparing past and present social conditions. For example, in certain regions of the world and cultures where women have historically been con /uniFB01 ned to domestic and socially prescribed roles, there persists a socially constructed notion of gender-speci /uniFB01 c occupations. In these contexts, women have traditionally been relegated to domestic life, while men have been engaged in physically demanding work. Consequently, men are more frequently exposed to environmental and physical stressors and are also more prone to alcohol abuse, smoking, and workplace accidents (Caruso et al., 2023b). The varying exposure to biological agents (such as viruses and bacteria) or chemical substances (such as heavy metals) can further result in differences in immune system adaptation to the challenges posed by the work environment, compared to the more exclusively domestic environments to which women have been con /uniFB01 ned in some cultures, even to this day (Oertelt-Prigione, 2012). An example illustrating the role of gender in the emergence of diseases can be seen in the incidence of certain types of cancer, such as mesothelioma in workers exposed to asbestos /uniFB01 bers and nasal cancer in those exposed to wood dust. These occupations are predominantly male dominated. Conversely, within this conceptual framework, women may face greater exposure to pollutants found in enclosed environments, such as those produced by heating and smoking (Oertelt-Prigione, 2012). Furthermore, the timing and extent of exposure vary, and these disparities are particularly pronounced in regions of the world where the status of women or

prevailing social conditions are less favorable. These social and cultural differences, which are re /uniFB02 ected in the occupational roles assigned to men and women, expose the immune systems of both genders to distinct stimuli and contribute to the observed differences in immune responses in the older population, underlying the establishment of the previously discussed health-survival paradox.

This phenomenon can serve as a partial explanation for why age-related mortality is higher in men than in women for certain types of infections or external agents. It also sheds light on why women tend to have a longer average lifespan than men. Another aspect of gender differences pertains to accessibility to food, particularly among older women, and it will be discussed later.

## 3 Sex and immune response

## 3.1 Sexual chromosomes and immune response

Regarding the role of sex chromosomes in immune response, it is important to note that most genes related to the immune system are autosomal. However, a high density of immune-related genes is located on the X chromosome (Oertelt-Prigione, 2012). Speci /uniFB01 cally, genes related to toll-like receptors (TLRs), cytokines, and activities of the T and B cells are situated on the X chromosome. This genetic linkage has revealed associations between certain sex-related diseases and immune system genes. Genes like TLR-7, TLR-9, the transcriptional factor forkhead box P3, the chemokine receptor CXCR3, CD40L, and interleukin 9 (IL-9) are located on chromosome X and have been shown to in /uniFB02 uence cytokine production [i.e., tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα ), interferon α (IFNα ) production], and the ability to respond to viral infections differently in women when compared to men (Klein et al., 2010; Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al., 2015; Oghumu et al., 2019). For instance, the respiratory syncytial virus affects more males than females due to a single nucleotide polymorphism on the IL-9 gene on chromosome X (Schuurhof et al., 2010). This difference is linked to the presence of a single X chromosome copy in males.

Onthe other hand, chromosome Y encodes a set of in /uniFB02 ammatory pathway genes that are exclusively expressed in men (Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al., 2015). The role of Y-linked genes in shaping sexual dimorphism in immunity has been investigated in model organisms like Drosophila melanogaster , where the regulation of immune genes appears to be in /uniFB02 uenced by the Y chromosome. This suggests that the Y chromosome may contribute to dimorphic immune evolution, although Y-linked variability is thought to be entirely epistatic (Kutch and Fedorka, 2015). In human studies focusing on Y haplogroup I in Europe and its association with coronary diseases, a strong correlation was found between Y chromosome genes and the immune system (Charchar et al., 2012). Speci /uniFB01 cally, a connection was established between the expression of pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory pathways and the development of cardiovascular diseases in men with haplogroup I (Charchar et al., 2012). This may also play a role in the differentiation of monocytes into macrophages, a process implicated in the formation of atherosclerotic plaques (Maan et al., 2017). Furthermore, there is evidence suggesting that genes related to adaptive immunity are downregulated in individuals with haplogroup I, rendering them more susceptible to viral infections. There has also

been a suggested correlation between haplogroup I and human immunode ciency virus (HIV) infection, with carriers experiencing /uniFB01 a more rapid progression to acquired immune de /uniFB01 ciency syndrome (AIDS) and showing greater resistance to anti-retroviral therapy (Charchar et al., 2012; Maan et al., 2017). Haplogroup I has also been linked to the downregulation of pathways involved in autoimmunity, especially in animal models of autoimmune diseases like experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (a model of multiple sclerosis) and experimental myocarditis. These associations strongly in /uniFB02 uence susceptibility and disease severity in these models (Spach et al., 2009). Transcriptomic analysis in animal models that are highly and less susceptible to these diseases has revealed differentially expressed transcripts in macrophages and CD4 + T cells (Maan et al., 2017). Similar observations have been made in male patients with an early form of multiple sclerosis known as clinically isolated syndrome. In these patients, CD4 + T cells exhibited differential expression of most of the Y genes identi /uniFB01 ed in mouse autoimmune models when compared to healthy subjects. This suggests a common Y-determined genetic basis for autoimmunity in both mice and humans (Maan et al., 2017). These /uniFB01 ndings may contribute to explaining the higher susceptibility of men to certain types of infections and their decreased ability to mount an adaptive response when compared to an in /uniFB02 ammatory one.

Therefore, women possess a distinct advantage in their immune response, stemming from cellular mosaicism resulting from dose compensation silencing and the presence of polymorphisms in X-linked genes (Dodd and Menon, 2022). These factors provide women with a more adaptive and balanced cellular toolkit during innate immune responses. On the other hand, variability or incomplete inactivation of the X chromosome may contribute to more pronounced in /uniFB02 ammatory responses (Casimir and Duchateau, 2011). This may contribute to the higher incidence of autoimmune diseases in women and lower activation of the immune system in men who inherit only one X chromosome from their mother, which is not subject to silencing (Flanagan, 2014; Sun et al., 2022). Indeed, many immune disorders are X-linked. One example is severe combined immunode /uniFB01 ciency, characterized by de /uniFB01 ciencies in T and natural killer (NK) cells, as well as functionally impaired mature B cells. It is caused by a mutation in the cytokine receptor γ -chain gene, which is located on the X chromosome (Tasher and Dalal, 2012). On the other hand, there are no known Y-linked immune diseases in humans. The sex-biased immune characterization also extends to the differential expression of micro-RNAs (miRNAs) in males and females. It has been discovered that miRNA expression, maturation, and function are in /uniFB02 uenced by both genetic and hormonal factors. Indeed, there are 113 genes related to miRNAs located on the X chromosome, while only two are found on the Y chromosome. Additionally, the expression of miRNA genes is in /uniFB02 uenced by the dose compensation process in the same way as other genes on the X chromosome, and variations in this process may lead to a greater expression of miRNAs in women than in men (Sharma and Eghbali, 2014; Di Palo et al., 2020). When miRNA genes escape silencing during the dose compensation process, it increases the likelihood of inactivating immunosuppressive genes that regulate the immune response. This, in turn, implies a higher incidence of autoimmune disease manifestation in women than in men (Jaillon et al., 2019). This phenomenon was demonstrated in a murine model of systemic

lupus erythematosus (SLE), where the expression of X-linked miRNAs, such as the miR-182 cluster, miR-155, miR-31, and miR-148a, was higher in female mice than in male mice and could be in /uniFB02 uenced also by the estrogen levels (Sharma and Eghbali, 2014).

Table 1 reports the main in /uniFB02 uences of sexual chromosomes on immune responses with aging.

## 3.2 Hormones and the immune response

The role of sex hormones in immunity has been well established. The /uniFB01 rst evidence dates back to the 19th century when changes in the thymus were observed after castration procedures. Subsequently, differences in the composition of immune cells and immunoglobulins between women and men were noted (Gie /uniFB01 ngKröll et al., 2015). The main sexual hormones are estrogen for women and androgen for men. These hormones have receptors on both innate and adaptive immune cells, with estrogen receptors being found on B cells, T cells, dendritic cells (DCs), macrophages, and NK cells, while androgen receptors are present on T and B lymphocytes (Carrega and Ferlazzo, 2012; Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al., 2015; Taneja, 2018). Females experience different levels of immunomodulation throughout their lives, with three key endocrinological transitions: from the reproductive phase to pregnancy and ultimately to menopause.

During pregnancy, there is a shift from a T helper 1 (Th1) immune response toward a Th2 response (Asaba et al., 2015; Dodd and Menon, 2022). Additionally, the activity of regulatory T cells is enhanced by high progesterone levels, often leading to the remission of autoimmune diseases (McCarthy, 2000; Desai and Brinton, 2019). However, this shift can also make individuals more susceptible to infectious diseases, such as Spanish in /uniFB02 uenza (Restifo, 2000; Fuhler, 2020). In adaptive immunity, estrogen stimulates Th2 responses and activates antibody production by in /uniFB02 uencing B cells. This can favor the production of autoreactive cells, which may induce autoimmune diseases (Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al., 2015). Furthermore, the use of oral contraceptives can in /uniFB02 uence the ability of the body to respond to infections. For example, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases is faster in women who use oral contraceptives than in men, particularly in the case of HIV infection (Oertelt-Prigione, 2012; Addo and Altfel, 2014). During pregnancy and breastfeeding, another hormone that increases is prolactin. Hyperprolactinemia is considered to be associated with the manifestation of autoimmune diseases, such as SLE. Prolactin affects T cells and monocytes, particularly by inducing the expression of T-bet in T cells, which leads to the production of Th1 cytokines. This contributes to the in /uniFB02 ammatory process and hormone release, such as estrogen (Lahita, 2023). By contrast, menopause has a negative impact on immune function and is associated with an increased susceptibility of menopausal women to autoimmune disorders (Min et al., 2021). There is also evidence that hormone intervention can help restore the situation. However, the situation is different for men, as hormone levels can in /uniFB02 uence the capacity of the immune system to respond to challenges in a different way than in women (Sciarra et al., 2023). Androgens, for instance, can modulate the development of Th1 responses and the activation of CD8 + T cells (Klein et al., 2010; Henze et al., 2020).

Hormonal changes drive immune modi /uniFB01 cations, with a critical period starting at the onset of the menopausal phase. The gradual decline in hormones, guided by sex, has a signi /uniFB01 cant impact on the aging immune system (Márquez et al., 2020), primarily because immune cells possess estrogen receptors that can in /uniFB02 uence downstream immune-in /uniFB02 ammatory pathways, such as the nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NFκ B) pathway. As individuals age, estrogen supplementation therapies are involved in enhancing immune function and counteracting in /uniFB02 ammaging (Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al., 2015). Androgens and progesterone play immunosuppressive roles in men, which can lead to increased mortality from infections (Gay et al., 2021). It is a well-established fact that men who undergo castration tend to live longer than men with normal levels of male hormones (Austad and Bartke, 2015). Conversely, it is not de /uniFB01 nitively established that women who undergo ovariectomy or reach post-menopause without hormone supplementation live shorter lives than women with normal hormone levels. Limited data are available from animal models. Ovariectomized rats showed an increase in oxidative stress levels, linked to worsened health conditions, which were subsequently restored with hormone supplementation. This is attributed to the estrogen regulatory effect on oxidative processes, which contributes to the in /uniFB02 ammatory state associated with aging (Austad and Fischer, 2016).

The role of hormones warrants further exploration to better understand their potential contribution to immune maintenance in women when compared to men, especially in older individuals where hormone levels decline. Indeed, a potential long-term effect of estrogen has been observed in the proportion of mucosa-associated invariant T cells in women when compared to men, suggesting a possible epigenetic in /uniFB02 uence of hormones on the differentiation and maintenance of immune cells (Patin et al., 2018). Exposure to estrogen during puberty and the fertile age may promote favorable epigenetic changes in immune cells in women, which could persist for much of their lives, even during the postmenopausal period (Thompson et al., 2018). Furthermore, hormone supplementation in women may slow down the negative effects of sex dimorphism on immunity, whereas testosterone supplementation is not recommended for men (Decaroli and Rochira, 2017). Additionally, it is challenging to distinguish the contributions of genetics (X- and Y-linked genes) and hormones in shaping immune responses (Oertelt-Prigione, 2012). Several genome-wide association studies have considered genomic differences between sexes, but these differences may only be signi /uniFB01 cant for one sex and not the other, leading to the loss of sex-speci /uniFB01 c information, which becomes a covariate in the analysis (Liu et al., 2012).

Table 2 reports the main evidence regarding the effects of hormones on immune aging.

## 4 Gender effects on immune response

Gender interacts with biological factors in the development and outcomes of the immune response. Differences in family and work environments regarding male and female roles are responsible for varying patterns of exposure to microbes. Additionally, there may be

disparities in the intake of micronutrients and access to preventive healthcare facilities. Malnutrition among older people, coupled with gender bias, which can be in /uniFB02 uenced by economic factors, may be impacted by physiological changes such as decreased sensory capacity (taste and smell), alterations in oral functionality (such as dryness and mechanical issues), and psychological elements (like loneliness and depression) (Kaur et al., 2019; Caruso et al., 2023b). Furthermore, older people today, especially those who have reached or exceeded one hundred years of age, may have experienced different socioeconomic conditions in their youth, such as wars and periods of famine, or they may have had diverse nutritional habits (Accardi et al., 2019; Aiello et al., 2021). These factors could have had a lasting impact on their immune systems. Certain foods, in fact, can promote epigenetic and transcriptional changes that affect the immune system (Puca et al., 2018). Compounds like arachidonic acid, quercetin, kaempferol, and curcumin possess immunoceutical activity, which means they can induce epigenetic modi /uniFB01 cations that in /uniFB02 uence immune cells, thereby shaping the nature and intensity of future responses to challenges. Other immunoceuticals, such as vitamins (particularly vitamins A, D, and E), have an impact on mast cells, lymphocytes, NK cells, and immunoglobulin production, directly affecting the ability of the immune system to function effectively (Aiello et al., 2019). Considering certain social aspects, the nutritional impact of gender bias primarily affects women, who are often more likely to forget to eat in situations of economic distress, leading to a higher incidence of malnutrition among them. Additionally, in some parts of the world, access to clean drinking water is limited and coupled with restricted food intake, contaminated water is often used (Oertelt-Prigione, 2012). This results in a greater risk of infections and diseases, particularly among children and women in these families.

Healthcare access is considered another area where traditionally determined gender roles can lead to disparities. Access to healthcare is closely tied to the level of education, which often varies between males and females in many cultures and across generations in the Western world. Women living in developed countries are hospitalized more frequently than men, receive more medication, and report more physical health issues (Caruso et al., 2023b). As a result, women have higher rates of diagnosis and prevention of common diseases than do men (Tadiri et al., 2020). This difference in healthcare utilization may help explain why women tend to live longer but often in worse health conditions than men of the same age, as they are more frequently diagnosed and treated, while men may experience higher mortality. Moreover, the increased rate of diagnosis and treatment for women re ects /uniFB02 a shift away from socially constructed ideas that have historically hindered the recognition of certain medical conditions in women, often dismissing them as psychosomatic in nature. In countries without a universal healthcare system, access to healthcare depends on family prioritization strategies to cope with economic constraints, potentially resulting in limitations on speci /uniFB01 c treatments that could have side effects on the immune response (Caruso et al., 2023b).

In poorer regions of the world, the unfavorable economic and social conditions faced by women can limit their access to certain aspects of healthcare services, particularly those that require direct payment, which makes up a substantial portion of healthcare

expenses. This reduced access to proper healthcare for women can contribute to gender-based disparities and can also play a role in modulating the immune response. Furthermore, in some cultures, access to antibiotics, chemotherapeutic agents, and other medical treatments is not guaranteed by insurance or the state healthcare system. This unequal access can in /uniFB02 uence the course of infections and chronic diseases, such as cancer, in different ways for women and men (Alcade-Rubio et al., 2020).

Table 3 reports the main evidence regarding the effects of gender-related variables on immune aging.

## 5 Immune aging according to sex and gender

The aging of the immune system impacts both innate and adaptive immunity, leading to a diminished capacity to perform normal immune functions, called immunosenescence. These functions include defending the body against pathogenic threats, responding to vaccinations, and participating in the removal of damaged cells, such as senescent ones (Caruso et al., 2022). The immune system possesses several key characteristics, such as plasticity, degeneracy, networking, and a bow tie architecture (Tieri et al., 2010). Based on these properties, the older population comprises individuals with unique immunological characteristics due to the various stimuli that they have encountered throughout their lifetimes, contributing to the development of their immunobiography (Caruso et al., 2022). Immunobiography and trained immunity may play a role in immune aging and contribute to the signi /uniFB01 cant heterogeneity of immune parameters, particularly observed in centenarian populations (Ligotti et al., 2021a; Ligotti et al., 2023a; Ligotti et al., 2023b; Ligotti et al., 2023c). Therefore, understanding an individual s infections and vaccination history can provide valuable ' insights into changes in the immune system with age. Additionally, biological factors such as the mode of birth (natural or caesarean), initial feeding method (breast or bottle), other biological factors (i.e., microbiome composition), and gender factors as socioeconomic factors (i.e., nutritional habits, occupational exposures) and educational background, can shape innate and adaptive immune cells over the course of a person s ' life, particularly during the aging process. These factors in /uniFB02 uence the ability to respond to both endogenous and exogenous challenges based on the type, intensity, and chronological order of antigens encountered (Franceschi et al., 2017). Note, however, that the results of Ligotti et al. (2023a, b, c) reinforced the suggestion that immune aging should be viewed as a speci /uniFB01 c adaptation rather than a general immune alteration. According to this perspective, certain changes in immune mechanisms could be how the oldest individuals successfully adapt to a history of challenges, thereby achieving longevity in light of these considerations; de /uniFB01 ning immune aging requires more than just examining changes in immunophenotypes and should necessitate evaluating a range of conditions, such as the conceptualization of gender, as discussed above.

In the following paragraphs, we will discuss the effects of gender and sex on immune system cells, the response to infectious diseases, and vaccinations during aging. However, the studies that we are reporting on immune system cells do not allow us to distinguish the

effects of sex from those of gender because we do not have information about the immunobiography or the socioeconomic and educational history of the subjects studied (and therefore, the observed epigenetic changes could be linked to both sex and gender). As for the other two aspects, a discussion on the effects of gender is possible.

However, it must be noted that one of the mechanisms through which gender can negatively in /uniFB02 uence the control of the immune response is through nutrition. Economic conditions and dietary practices in /uniFB02 uence the type and quantity of food consumed by individuals of different genders. Malnutrition and limited intake of certain foods that contain essential micronutrients like iron, zinc, copper, selenium, or vitamins can have signi /uniFB01 cant impacts on health and the immune system. Insuf /uniFB01 cient consumption of speci /uniFB01 c foods with immunoceutical properties may affect the ability of the body to respond to pathogens (Tieu et al., 2022). Furthermore, malnutrition or undernutrition is closely linked to immunode ciency. /uniFB01 Immunoceuticals have the potential to modify and regulate immune responses by in /uniFB02 uencing the functionality of immune cells, thereby aiding in the defense against infections and immune-related conditions, such as autoimmune diseases or cancer development, which can also be age related. This effect becomes more apparent in advanced age, where limited food intake and an altered nutrient balance can contribute to immune system dysfunction.

## 5.1 Immune system cells

When it comes to the common characteristics of immune aging, several factors are noteworthy, such as thymic involution, and alterations in immune cells within both the innate and adaptive compartments. Thymic involution, which begins during infancy and is completed in puberty, results in reduced production of new antigen-responsive T cells and a signi /uniFB01 cant decline in the population of naive (CD45RA + CCR7 + ) T cells during the aging process. Alongside the reduction in naive T cells, aging is accompanied by an increased presence of memory cells, which are categorized as central (CD45RO + CCR7 + ), effector (CD45RO + CCR7 ), and TEMRA -(CD45RA + CCR7 ) T cells. TEMRA -cells, characterized as terminally differentiated cells, are believed to be triggered by chronic latent infections, such as human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection (Garnica et al., 2022). TEMRA cells have limited proliferative capacity but are capable of exerting cytotoxic activity, particularly during virus reactivation phases. This phenomenon may lead to immune dysfunction in older individuals, where the ability to mount a novel immune response is compromised due to the expansion of HCMV-speci /uniFB01 c memory T cells at the expense of cells searching for new antigens (Garnica et al., 2022). Furthermore, the aging process is marked by the loss of expression of co-stimulatory molecules on immune cells, such as CD27 and CD28, which play a role in the diminishing capacity to respond to antigens. Another aspect to consider is the potential reversal of the CD4 /CD8 + + T-cell ratio, which is associated with an increase in terminally differentiated cells within the CD8 compartment and an elevation in senescent T cells. This inversion of the CD4 + /CD8 + T-cell ratio is also linked to a reduced presence of active B cells, leading to a decreased ability

to mount a humoral response (Li et al., 2019). On the other hand, innate immunity is affected by changes in the number, function, and differentiation capabilities of DCs, alterations in neutrophil defense and chemotactic abilities, shifts in monocyte phagocytic and defense functions, as well as variations in the capacity of NK cells to produce cytokines and in their subset distribution (Aiello et al., 2022).

Differences in the number and percentage of T-cell subpopulations, and their proliferative capacity, functions, and phenotypes have been observed between the two sexes across the lifespan. In a study involving a cohort of healthy volunteers strati /uniFB01 ed by sex and divided into age subgroups (ranging from 22 to 93 years), it was found that women were less affected than men by the decrease in the number of CD8 + , CD4 + CD45RA + (naive T cells), and CD8 + CD28 + T cells (activated T cells) with aging. Additionally, women exhibited a smaller decline in B-cell counts and in the T-cell proliferation index (Márquez et al., 2020). On the other hand, there was an age-related increase in women in the number of CD4 + T cells (such as CD4 + naive T cells), CD4 + CD45RO + T cells (effector T cells), NK cells, and the CD4 + /CD8 + T-cell ratio when compared to men. When differentiating the roles of age and sex, the study revealed that age played a more signi /uniFB01 cant role in the decline of CD8 + T cells in men, whereas the decrease in CD4 + T cells was observed with less dependence on age. In terms of changes in B-cell counts, both sex and age were found to have a concomitant in /uniFB02 uence. In other studies, data from a cohort of semiand supercentenarians (aged 105 -110 years) indicated that the percentage and phenotypes of certain T and NK subsets affected by immune aging exhibited heterogeneity in this extreme age group. Furthermore, some individuals showed values comparable to those of younger populations, underscoring the potential signi /uniFB01 cant contribution of immunobiography in shaping the immune system during aging. Unfortunately, the study could not analyze these /uniFB01 ndings by sex, primarily due to well-known sex disparities among semi- and supercentenarians (Ligotti et al., 2023a; Ligotti et al., 2023b; Ligotti et al., 2023c).

Another study conducted on a Japanese population ranging from 20- to 90-year olds, which con /uniFB01 rmed the impact of aging on lymphocyte populations and proliferation rates, revealed a sexbiased trend. Females were found to be less susceptible to agerelated changes in the immune system, exhibiting a high percentage of CD4 + naive T cells, memory CD4 + T cells, NK cells, and a favorable CD4 + /CD8 + ratio. By contrast, males had fewer CD8 + T cells and naive CD4 + T cells, and women had a higher number of B cells than men (Hirokawa et al., 2013). These /uniFB01 ndings suggest that women experience a slower rate of decline in these immunological parameters than men. The authors of the study concluded that agerelated changes in various immunological parameters differ between men and women, possibly because women have a lower biological age. These results align with the observation that women tend to live longer than men. For example, at the time of the study in Japan, the average life expectancy was 85.5 years for women and 79 years for men(Caruso et al., 2013). However, it is important to note that while this study suggests a connection between immunity and longevity, it is possible that Japanese women exhibited a more favorable immunological pro /uniFB01 le because they were in good health.

The different composition of immune cells, which impacts the functionality of the immune system with aging, is also determined by epigenetic changes. As discussed earlier, biological factors such as

hormones and non-biological factors like lifestyle, which includes nutrition, can in /uniFB02 uence the epigenetic signature, altering the accessibility of chromatin associated with immune-related genes (Klein and Flanagan, 2016; Shepherd et al., 2021). As demonstrated by Márquez et al. (2020), transcriptomic and epigenetic signature changes are more pronounced due to aging in men than in women. Although some alterations in chromatin accessibility and epigenetic signature are observed equally in both sexes (i.e., decline in naive T cells, gain in cytotoxic memory CD8 + T cells, and NK cells), men exhibit a speci /uniFB01 c decline in the accessibility to B-cell loci and a greater increase in function related to monocyte loci when compared to women (Márquez et al., 2020). Therefore, external factors can shape the immune system, in /uniFB02 uencing the changes that occur with aging. For example, in a study involving the treatment of endometrial /uniFB01 broblasts with estrogen, it has been demonstrated that hormonal administration induces variations in the methylome pro /uniFB01 le, and in the transcriptome and chromatin structure. In vivo , these changes are more pronounced during different hormonal phases in women, such as during pregnancy and menopause, when the hormone levels and types undergo more rapid /uniFB02 uctuations when compared to the testosterone levels in men (Klein and Flanagan, 2016; Shepherd et al., 2021). The differential activation of NK cells with aging and between women and men may also be in /uniFB02 uenced by hormonal factors. Estrogen and progesterone, for instance, have inhibitory effects on NK cells (Huang et al., 2021). As discussed previously, Márquez et al. (2020) demonstrated sex-based differences in epigenetic changes that occur with aging in naive, monocytes, and cytotoxic cells, with a more pronounced decline in B-cell -speci /uniFB01 c loci in men (Márquez et al., 2020). These differences coincide with two breakpoints during the lifespan. The /uniFB01 rst breakpoint occurs at a similar age (around 40 years) in both sexes, while the second occurs earlier in men, who experience epigenetic aging 5 -6 years earlier. This difference aligns with the overall gap in life expectancy between the sexes, with men typically living 12 -15 years less than women on average. Consequently, DNA methylome changes occur more rapidly in men. Understanding the degree of in /uniFB02 uence of contributing factors responsible for the faster epigenetic changes in men, such as genetic background (ancestral genetic characteristics) and lifestyle habits (i.e., smoking, drinking, and nutrition), is essential (Xiao et al., 2018).

When we delve deeper into the alterations of immune cells with aging, an analysis of neutrophils from older mice, strati /uniFB01 ed by sex and compared to their younger counterparts, reveals signi /uniFB01 cant sexbiased modi /uniFB01 cations at the molecular level in both transcriptome and epigenome. These modi /uniFB01 cations become more pronounced with aging, particularly in male neutrophils (Lu et al., 2021). Neutrophils experience a loss of phagocytic ability, reduced adhesion, and impaired chemotaxis as they age, signi /uniFB01 cantly affecting their capacity to respond to infections and contributing to age-related diseases. This could help explain the increased susceptibility of men to infections. Additionally, macrophages and monocytes undergo changes during the aging process, primarily in their phagocytic abilities, which are essential for eliminating pathogens, cellular debris, and senescent cells. These changes contribute to the manifestation of age-related diseases. Monocytes have been identi /uniFB01 ed as key contributors to the onset of in /uniFB02 ammation-aging, with their numbers increasing and their

functional abilities improving with age (Aiello et al., 2022). As per the epigenome analysis discussed earlier (Márquez et al., 2020), their activation appears to be more signi /uniFB01 cant in men than in women, potentially accounting for the higher levels of in /uniFB02 ammation observed in men (Cao et al., 2022). Furthermore, a single-cell analysis conducted on peripheral blood mononuclear cells from both young and adult individuals has revealed that CD14 + cells are the most affected by the aging process. This is re /uniFB02 ected in their increased expression of signaling pathways, such as those involving NOD-like receptors, NFκ B, TLRs, in /uniFB02 ammasomes, and mitogenactivated protein kinase (Zheng et al., 2020).

Regarding the properties of NK cells with aging, there is a noticeable shift toward cytotoxic CD56 dim CD16 + NK cells (Ligotti et al., 2021a; 2023b). However, these cells become dysfunctional, displaying reduced capacity to act on target cells, proliferate, and produce cytotoxic effectors. They also exhibit decreased interferon production but higher release of cytokines like IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF- , among others (Li et al., 2023). Additionally, there is a reduced α expression of activation receptors (NKp44, NKp30, and DNAM-1) and a shift of hematopoietic progenitor cells toward the NK/T cell lineages (Li et al., 2023). These /uniFB01 ndings align with post-transcriptional changes observed in both sexes. Similar observations can be made regarding B cells, which experience a decline with age due to reduced progenitors and subset diversity. This decline is accompanied by an increase in memory B cells, which may contribute to heightened in /uniFB02 ammation in older individuals (Li et al., 2023). Moreover, the loss of B-cell diversity and the increase in memory B cells lead to a higher presence of autoantibodies in older people, predisposing them to the onset of autoimmune diseases. It is worth noting that while men are more affected by these changes, women have a higher incidence of autoimmune diseases, suggesting the involvement of other factors, such as hormones. Ultimately, both NK and B cells lose their antiviral activity as in /uniFB02 ammatory states become upregulated during aging (Li et al., 2023). Lastly, when examining gene modi /uniFB01 cations in T cells, age-associated changes become apparent in CD4 + T cells, which exhibit an enrichment in in /uniFB02 ammatory and effector genes. On the other hand, analysis of CD8 + T cells reveals increased expression of chemokines and granzymes, along with an uptick in apoptotic signaling pathways. These cells also show reduced chromatin remodeling and antiviral function (Zheng et al., 2020).

These data collectively elucidate the varying immune responses of women and men to external stimuli, which are also in /uniFB02 uenced by age. In women, immune parameters decline at a slower rate with aging, and genome activity is higher in women for acquired immunity than for innate immunity, resulting in a more robust humoral response (Caruso et al., 2022). By contrast, men exhibit higher gene activity in innate immunity. So, women display stronger immune responses, potentially contributing to the higher incidence of autoimmune diseases. Additionally, both sexes experience an increased pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory signature with age due to greater chromatin accessibility for in /uniFB02 ammation-related genes, which may underlie the onset of in /uniFB02 ammaging. While in /uniFB02 ammation rises with age in both sexes, it is more pronounced in men (Márquez et al., 2020). To gain a deeper understanding of these aspects, it is essential to explore immunobiography.

In this context, the microbiome composition with aging, often referred to as ' microb-aging, ' may play a signi /uniFB01 cant role. Microbaging is primarily characterized by a decline in Clostridiales and

Bi /uniFB01 dobacterium and an increase in Proteobacteria and pathobionts like Enterobacteriaceae (Bosco and Noti, 2021). The microbiome composition is in /uniFB02 uenced by environmental factors such as diet and medication. As individuals age, changes in dietary habits due to physical and psychological factors, coupled with increased medication use, can lead to dysbiosis. Several studies have demonstrated the impact of the microbiome on the development of immunosenescence, given the role of the immune system in maintaining microbiome integrity and balance throughout life. The host immune system acts as an architect, favoring commensal bacteria over pathogenic ones. However, this balance is disrupted with immunosenescence, partly due to changes in barriers and tissues resulting from cellular senescence. Animal experiments have shown that transplanting a young microbiome into aging models has positive effects on immunosenescence markers, which include reducing in /uniFB02 ammation and preserving the immune system function, regulation of antigen-speci /uniFB01 c T-cell responses, and antibody production (Bosco and Noti, 2021). Conversely, transplanting the gut microbiota of older animals into young ones worsened health conditions related to immune parameters. Although the composition of the microbiome is minimally in /uniFB02 uenced by sex, some changes have been observed in the composition of gut microbiota among Bacteroides Prevotella strains, which are more represented in men. Nonetheless, there is a mutual interaction between gut microbiota and sex hormones, testosterone and estrogen. Additionally, gender can in /uniFB02 uence microbiome composition due to different bacterial exposures during birth or early life (Conway and Duggal, 2021), emphasizing the crucial role of exogenous and social factors in shaping immunity.

## 5.2 Different responses to bacterial and viral infections. The case of COVID-19

The literature data about infections in women and men show a sex-biased trend. In general, men are more susceptible to many infections, while women suffer more from diseases with enhanced immunopathological impact as measles, toxoplasmosis, and dengue. This sexual dimorphism in the immune response means that women are more resistant to infections but have a higher incidence of autoimmune diseases than men, however the relevance of autoimmune disorders for lifespan is negligible (Caruso and Vasto, 2016; Hoffmann et al., 2020). It is evident that beneath these differences lie the biological factors outlined in the previous paragraphs, but there is also a role for gender differences, as demonstrated by the analysis of the COVID-19 pandemic.

First, men are more prone to develop parasitic infections than women (i.e., Leishmania , Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax , Schistosoma mansoni ), while bacterial infections affect the two sexes by different grades. Females, for example, are more susceptible to Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Bordetella pertussis infections but respond better to Streptococcus and meningococcus infections, while men are more prone to develop sepsis and to infections by Streptococcus , Pneumococcus , Mycobacterium , and Campylobacter . For the viral infections, there is a double bias: sex linked and age related. Males are more susceptible in childhood to develop viral infections, while women in adulthood can show more

severe forms than men to some viral infections (see below) (Gie /uniFB01 ngKröll et al., 2015). This difference may be due to biological aspects, such as hormone regulation of the immune response or immunosenescence grade. It has been shown that postmenopausal women succumb more to pandemic strain of in /uniFB02 uenza than men. The worst response to in /uniFB02 uenza is given by the higher in /uniFB02 ammatory response of women, due to the elevated levels of cytokines and chemokines produced toward the virus and by the lack of estrogenic action on immune cells with aging. While the higher rate of infection in men could be due to the immune suppressive role of testosterone (Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al., 2015). However, the data about in /uniFB02 uenza infection in sex-biases cohort and considering age are controversial, due to the different kinds of strains and the different prophylaxis practices through diverse countries. Males, indeed, present a higher viral load than women in the case of hepatitis C virus and HIV (Agrawal et al., 2021). Moreover, men are more affected by hepatitis A infections (Takahashi et al., 2020). Women, on the other hand, respond worse to sexually transmitted infections such as HIV, the progression of which is faster in women than in men. Hormone levels in women and the use of oral contraceptives contribute to this.

From December 2019 onward, SARS coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2) infection spread rapidly worldwide, to the extent that on 11 March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 as a global pandemic. SARS-CoV-2 is a Betacoronavirus of the Coronaviridae family that, like other respiratory coronaviruses, primarily spreads through respiratory droplets, preferentially infecting lung alveolar epithelial cells using the human angiotensin-converting enzyme II (ACE2) as an entry receptor and the transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) for priming by cleaving the viral spike. Most COVID-19 patients present with mild symptomatic disease and a moderate mortality rate, but older patients, particularly men rather than women, have a higher risk of developing severe disease (Hu et al., 2021a). Therefore, the male sex has been considered a predisposing factor to COVID19, with a generally higher mortality rate and high percentage of hospitalization and intensive cure admissions (Tadiri et al., 2020). The mortality for men has been about three times higher than that for women (Agrawal et al., 2021).

Following the previously mentioned initial steps of virus entry, before the induction of an immune response to SARS-CoV-2, the further sequence of events includes the innate sensing of viral RNA by TLR-7 with the production of IFN-I (Van der Sluis et al., 2022). Theoretically, sex differences could already operate at these points. ACE2 is, indeed, an X chromosome encoded -gene that is downregulated by estrogens, while TMPRSS2 is regulated by androgen receptor signaling (Baratchian et al., 2021). Furthermore, as discussed in the previous paragraphs, TLR-7 is more expressed in female immune cells, leading to increased production of type 1 IFNs through TLR-7 ligands (Berghöfer et al., 2006). However, to the best of our knowledge, the role of ACE2, TMPRSS2, and TLR-7, in the different outcomes of COVID19, between men and women, has not been fully demonstrated. Additionally, in a study, an ACE2 variant has been described as being able to reduce the risk but not the severity of infection; however, the sex was not considered (Horowitz et al., 2022). Regarding TMPRSS2, testosterone induces the expression of this receptor for SARS-CoV-2, suggesting that this might be one of the

causes leading to higher severity of COVID-19 cases in men than in women. Furthermore, mutations in androgen receptors located near the TMPRSS2 genes could lead to an exacerbation of severity in males in some countries where these variants are prevalent, suggesting that androgen deprivation therapy contributes to having less severe infections (Plebani and Lippi, 2022). In any case, surprisingly, some articles have reported that higher levels of ACE2 improve the outcome of COVID-19 in both sexes. This is related to the role of ACE2 and the renin -angiotensin -aldosterone system (RAAS) in the reduced exacerbation of comorbidities, such as cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, and respiratory distress syndrome, in which the RAAS plays a protective role and its levels de /uniFB01 ne the severity of COVID-19 (Plebani and Lippi, 2022).

As discussed by Ligotti et al. (2021b), it is believed that immune aging plays a key role in COVID-19 onset and outcome. Changes in innate immune responses, in particular numerical changes in DCs (Buttenschön and Mattner, 2021), and the inability to mount an effective adaptive immune response, together with a higher proin /uniFB02 ammatory state, may explain both the lack of control of viral replication and the potential clinical consequences triggered by a cytokine storm, typical of severe diseases. Thus, the remodeling of innate and adaptive immune responses observed with aging, which, as discussed in this review, differs between females and males, may partly explain the severity and mortality gradient of COVID-19 based on age and sex. For many people, indeed, SARS-CoV-2 is an emerging pathogen to which they have never been previously exposed, so the fundamental step in the immune response is undoubtedly its recognition by naive lymphocytes. The reduced number of peripheral naive T cells observed in older patients, indeed, leads to a failure to develop strong protective immunity against the virus. At the same time, there is an expansion of the memory T-cell pool, which is due to chronic persistent infections by HCMV, characterized by progressive downregulations of the costimulatory receptor CD28 and becoming terminally differentiated T cells. This interferes with the primary immune responses against the virus (Aiello et al., 2019). Another point to consider is the different distribution of lymphocyte helper and cytotoxic subsets between females and males during aging, which contributes to explaining the sex differences reported in response to SARSCoV-2 (Ligotti et al., 2021b). Furthermore, ageand sex-related changes in the distribution of B cells (the age-related decline of B cells in the blood being more dramatic in males) compromise the quality and intensity of the immune response elicited by SARS-CoV2. In addition, hormones seem to have a role in the shaping of immune cell distribution among sexes, due also to the capacity to favor long-lasting epigenetic modi /uniFB01 cations, and this seems more pronounced in females than in males, as stated above (Patin et al., 2018). The last hallmark of the older immune system, in /uniFB02 ammaging, associated with increased production of pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines, acute phase proteins, and oxidative stress, potentiates the virus-induced cytokine storm responsible for severe lung disease (Hu et al., 2021b).

Older males with one or more comorbidities are the most susceptible group showing the highest mortality and morbidity. However, the surprising resistance to COVID-19 that has characterized a large number of Belgian and Italian centenarians is noteworthy (Poulain et al., 2021; Caruso et al., 2023a). In a recent narrative review (Caruso et al., 2023b), the literature on the role of

age and sex in the fatal outcome of COVID-19 has been revisited. The literature review has demonstrated that women are more resilient to COVID-19, con /uniFB01 rming the data showing that women live longer than men, even in the case of experienced severe famines and epidemics. The related data concerning female centenarians are con /uniFB02 icting. In general, the mortality rate among centenarians is not much lower than among the younger elderly population. This is probably due to their frail state. During the /uniFB01 rst wave of the 2020 pandemic, however, centenarians over 101 years old (i.e., born before 1919), died less than the other elderly, including the ' youngest centenarians , ' demonstrating greater resilience to COVID-19. This shows that resilience correlates with likely contemporaneity with the 1918 Spanish /uniFB02 u epidemic, although the mechanisms involved remain unclear.

Despite that most data point out the higher incidence of serious cases and death in males, the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection according to sex seems to be discordant among different populations, according to the socioeconomic and cultural aspects, which belong to gender de /uniFB01 nition parameters. In the case of reported lower resilience in women to COVID-19, for example, this may refer to developing countries and could be due to lesser accessibility to healthcare for women than is for men, leading to false results regarding the incidence between the two sexes (Plebani and Lippi, 2022). Indeed, several factors are believed to in /uniFB02 uence susceptibility to and the severity of COVID-19 (in addition to virus genetics and the presence of comorbidities) such as lifestyle, which refers to habits (such as diet, exercise, smoking, and drug use), and the socioeconomic status (such as education, access to highquality medical information, and access to the healthcare system); in other words, social determinants of health. Other in /uniFB02 uencing factors could be the environment, which encompasses exposure to xenobiotics and multiple pathogens, and the genetics of immune responses (Ligotti et al., 2021b; Pojero et al., 2021).

Tadiri et al. (2020) found that in countries reporting sexdisaggregated data, institutionalized gender inequality (as measured by the United Nations Development Program s Gender ' Inequality Index) is positively associated with the male-to-female ratio of reported COVID-19 cases. In fact, in countries with higher gender inequality, men accounted for the majority of cases. The hypothesis to be supported by future studies is that institutionalized gender inequality and culturally entrenched roles and norms may in /uniFB02 uence who is at a higher risk of contracting the infection (gender indeed plays a role, in determining different behaviors between men and women that could in /uniFB02 uence exposure to the virus with varying impacts on infection and outcomes) or who can undergo diagnostic testing. Regarding these last points, it has been shown that although women are more proactive about their health and visit doctors more often than men, they often receive less intensive diagnostic and treatment interventions, as the symptoms they report are frequently underestimated by doctors and considered psychosomatic.

Concluding this paragraph, the results of a study analyzing differences in excess mortality between the two sexes in 27 European countries, covering the seasons from 2016/2017 to 2019/2020, is considered (Nielsen et al., 2021). In situations of excess mortality, such as during the winter circulation of respiratory pathogens, excess mortality increases more for males than for females, and this pattern has been observed with similar magnitudes during in /uniFB02 uenza epidemics and the SARS-CoV-

2 pandemic. Therefore, the sex and gender differences observed in COVID-19 associated -deaths would not represent a speci /uniFB01 c feature of the COVID-19 pandemic but rather be a characteristic common to all infections, or at least to respiratory ones.

## 5.3 Response to vaccines

Vaccination responses are generally stronger in women than in men, and this responsiveness tends to decrease with age, albeit at a slower rate in women than in men. In fact, immune aging has been shown to impair the ability to respond to vaccination in older individuals. Recent data indicate that vaccine response ef /uniFB01 ciency is approximately 51% among young people aged 18 -64 years, but it decreases to 43% in individuals aged over 65 years (Garnica et al., 2022).

Testosterone is known to have immunosuppressive effects. Studies in humans have observed that males exhibit lower antibody titers in response to in /uniFB02 uenza vaccination than females. This suggests that testosterone directly affects immune cells by inhibiting transcription factors responsible for immune activation. Consequently, these transcription factors suppress the expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism, which have immunosuppressive properties, creating a negative feedback loop. Men with elevated serum testosterone levels and the corresponding gene signatures have shown the lowest antibody responses (Furman et al., 2014).

However, the advantage in vaccination response is not observed in post-menopausal women, as they lack the contribution of certain steroid hormones to the immune system. The administration of hormone replacement therapy can signi /uniFB01 cantly improve the vaccine response. Experiments conducted using animal models, in which ovariectomy was performed, have demonstrated that hormone replacement therapy reduces the increase of terminally differentiated cells and cytokine-secreting cells in response to vaccination. Additionally, it normalizes the levels of cytokines and immunoglobulins produced, leading to enhanced production of neutralizing antibodies (Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll et al., 2015). Women generally exhibit stronger humoral responses to vaccines, with higher antibody titers following measles, in /uniFB02 uenza, hepatitis B, and tetanus vaccinations. By contrast, males tend to have a better response to vaccines against yellow fever, pneumococcal polysaccharide, and meningococcal A and C (Flanagan, 2014). Regarding COVID-19 vaccination, data have shown that women have a stronger response characterized by higher antibody production capabilities, although a higher number of cases of side effects following vaccination have been reported in women (Plebani and Lippi, 2022). Data from older patients in a long-term care facility showed that the response to COVID-19 vaccination at 7 days and 1 year after vaccination was similar regardless of gender, although antibody titers varied depending on speci /uniFB01 c comorbidities. Additionally, female subjects experienced localized adverse side effects at the vaccination site (Trevisan et al., 2023).

The main consideration about the correlation between vaccine administration and side effects in the female population is affected by a systematic mistake. Women are often excluded from drug and vaccine trials due to concerns about the potential impact of hormones on the menstrual cycle or the risk of pregnancy.

Consequently, much of the available data are derived from trials conducted primarily or to a greater extent in males. Thus, besides genetic and biological factors, exogenous factors must be considered in response to immune-based therapies. For example, when examining the relationship between gender bias and vaccination response, reports have indicated misinformation regarding sample sizes and a lack of research that includes sex strati /uniFB01 cation. These limitations hinder our comprehensive understanding of genderbased differences in responses. Furthermore, vaccination data are in /uniFB02 uenced by inequalities in vaccine distribution in poorer regions of the world, where access to vaccination and basic medications (such as antibiotics) remains restricted or limited for females, often due to regressive and misogynistic views or economic and social issues (UNICEF DATA, 2023). This underscores the persisting gender disparities that impact vaccine distribution and responses to infection.

So, gender-related barriers and gender inequality can hinder people from getting vaccinated. The goal of gender equity is to ensure that everyone has the same opportunities and access to bene /uniFB01 t from immunization services. The different social roles assigned to women and men affect the degree to which women have access and control over decisions regarding their health and, unfortunately, that of their children, which include vaccinations. This is because men often act as decision makers within families due to unequal power dynamics and gender inequality. Decision-making capability is strongly associated with the immunization status of children. Mothers who perceive spousal permission is required for their child s vaccination are less likely to complete the vaccination ' cycle. In conclusion, gender has an impact on immunization both on the demand side, through health-seeking behaviors, and on the supply side of healthcare service (Tracey et al., 2022).

## 6 Concluding remarks

In older people, various alterations of innate and acquired immunity have been described and considered detrimental, leading to the term ' immunosenescence. ' It is a complex process involving multiple reorganizational and developmentally regulated changes, rather than a simple unidirectional decline of the overall function. Hence, the term ' immune aging ' is used to describe this phenomenon. Sexual dimorphism signi /uniFB01 cantly in /uniFB02 uences almost all physiological and pathophysiological processes in human beings, such as immune aging. Sexual dimorphism accounts for distinct immune parameters and responses between males and females. Women tend to display stronger responses to pathogens than men, which aids in recovering from infections and enhances vaccine ef /uniFB01 cacy. However, these stronger immune responses also make women more susceptible to autoimmune diseases. Gender plays a role in the development and outcomes of immune responses in conjunction with biological factors. Differences in family and workplace roles between males and females can lead to diverse patterns of pathogen exposure. Additionally, in older individuals, the immune system may be affected by disparities in micronutrient intake. Health promotion knowledge is correlated with educational

attainment, which is represented differently among males and females across various cultures and generations, potentially resulting in varying access to preventive and curative healthcare facilities. In countries without a universal healthcare system, access to medical care depends on family prioritization strategies to cope with economic constraints. In developing countries, all of this may lead to limitations in speci /uniFB01 c treatments that could have potential side effects on the immune response. Given the importance of the immune system in achieving longevity, it is not surprising that in developed countries, women live longer than men, and the number of female centenarians is higher than that of male centenarians. However, studying the role of these differences can be useful for the development of targeted interventions and healthcare approaches to achieve healthier aging. Figure 2 summarizes what has been discussed in this review.

## Author contributions

AC: Manuscript writing -original draft, and review and editing. GA and AA: manuscript writing -review and editing. CC and GC: manuscript writing -original draft and writing -review and editing.

## Funding

The authors declare that /uniFB01 nancial support was received for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Original work performed by the authors from the University of Palermo is funded by the 20157ATSLF project (Discovery of molecular, and genetic/epigenetic signatures underlying resistance to age-related diseases and comorbidities), granted by the Italian Ministry of Education, University, and Research, and the project Improved Vaccination Strategies for Older Adults granted by the European Commission (Horizon 2020 ID 848).

## Con ict of interest /uniFB02

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or /uniFB01 nancial relationships that could be construed as a potential con /uniFB02 ict of interest.

The authors have declared that they were editorial board members of Frontiers, at the time of submission. This had no impact on the peer review process and the /uniFB01 nal decision.

## Publisher s note '

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their af /uniFB01 liated organizations, or those of the publisher, editors, and reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

## References

Accardi, G., Aprile, S., Candore, G., Caruso, C., Cusimano, R., Cristaldi, L., et al. (2019). Genotypic and phenotypic aspects of longevity: results from a Sicilian survey and implication for the prevention and treatment of age-related diseases. Curr. Pharm. Des. 25 (3), 228 -235. doi:10.2174/1381612825666190313115233

Addo, M. M., and Altfeld, M. (2014). Sex-based differences in HIV type 1 pathogenesis. J. Infect. Dis. 209 (Suppl. 3), S86 -S92. doi:10.1093/infdis/jiu175

Agrawal, S., Salazar, J., Tran, T. M., and Agrawal, A. (2021). Sex-related differences in innate and adaptive immune responses to SARS-CoV-2. Front. Immunol. 12, 739757. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2021.739757

Aiello, A., Accardi, G., Aprile, S., Caldarella, R., Carru, C., Ciaccio, M., et al. (2021). Age and gender-related variations of molecular and phenotypic parameters in A cohort of Sicilian population: from young to centenarians. Aging Dis. 12 (7), 1773 -1793. doi:10. 14336/AD.2021.0226

Aiello, A., Farzaneh, F., Candore, G., Caruso, C., Davinelli, S., Gambino, C. M., et al. (2019). Immunosenescence and its hallmarks: how to oppose aging strategically? A review of potential options for therapeutic intervention. Front. Immunol. 10, 2247. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2019.02247

Aiello, A., Ligotti, M. E., Garnica, M., Accardi, G., Calabrò, A., Pojero, F., et al. (2022). How can we improve vaccination response in old people? Part I: targeting immunosenescence of innate immunity cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (17), 9880. doi:10. 3390/ijms23179880

Alcalde-Rubio, L., Hernández-Aguado, I., Parker, L. A., Bueno-Vergara, E., and Chilet-Rosell, E. (2020). Gender disparities in clinical practice: are there any solutions? Scoping review of interventions to overcome or reduce gender bias in clinical practice. Int. J. Equity Health 19 (1), 166. doi:10.1186/s12939-020-01283-4

Archer, C. R., Recker, M., Duffy, E., and Hosken, D. J. (2018). Intralocus sexual con /uniFB02 ict can resolve the male-female health-survival paradox. Nat. Commun. 9, 5048. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07541-y

Asaba, J., Bandyopadhyay, M., Kindy, M., and Dasgupta, S. (2015). Estrogen receptor signal in regulation of B cell activation during diverse immune responses. Int. J. Biochem. Cell. Biol. 68, 42 -47. doi:10.1016/j.biocel.2015.08.012

Austad, S. N., and Bartke, A. (2015). Sex differences in longevity and in responses to anti-aging interventions: a mini-review. Gerontology 62 (1), 40 -46. doi:10.1159/ 000381472

Austad, S. N., and Fischer, K. E. (2016). Sex differences in lifespan. Cell. Metab. 23 (6), 1022 -1033. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2016.05.019

Baggio, G., Corsini, A., Floreani, A., Giannini, S., and Zagonel, V. (2013). Gender medicine: a task for the third millennium. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 51 (4), 713 -727. doi:10.1515/cclm-2012-0849

Baratchian, M., McManus, J. M., Berk, M. P., Nakamura, F., Mukhopadhyay, S., Xu, W., et al. (2021). Androgen regulation of pulmonary AR, TMPRSS2 and ACE2 with implications for sex-discordant COVID-19 outcomes. Sci. Rep. 11, 11130. doi:10.1038/ s41598-021-90491-1

Berghöfer, B., Frommer, T., Haley, G., Fink, L., Bein, G., and Hackstein, H. (2006). TLR7 ligands induce higher IFN-alpha production in females. J. Immunol. 177, 2088 -2096. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.177.4.2088

Berta, P., Hawkins, J., Sinclair, A., Taylor, A., Grif /uniFB01 ths, B. L., Goodfellow, P. N., et al. (1990). Genetic evidence equating SRY and the testis-determining factor. Nature 348, 448 -450. doi:10.1038/348448a0

Bosco, N., and Noti, M. (2021). The aging gut microbiome and its impact on host immunity. Genes. Immun. 22 (5-6), 289 -303. doi:10.1038/s41435-021-00126-8

Bronikowski, A. M., Meisel, R. P., Biga, P. R., Walters, J. R., Mank, J. E., Larschan, E., et al. (2022). Sex-speci /uniFB01 c aging in animals: perspective and future directions. Aging Cell. 21 (2), e13542. doi:10.1111/acel.13542

Buttenschön, J., and Mattner, J. (2021). The interplay between dendritic cells and CD8 T lymphocytes is a crucial component of SARS-CoV-2 immunity. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 18 (2), 247 -249. doi:10.1038/s41423-020-00624-1

Cao, Y., Fan, Y., Li, F., Hao, Y., Kong, Y., Chen, C., et al. (2022). Phenotypic and functional alterations of monocyte subsets with aging. Immun. Ageing 19 (1), 63. doi:10. 1186/s12979-022-00321-9

Carrega, P., and Ferlazzo, G. (2012). Natural killer cell distribution and traf /uniFB01 cking in human tissues. Front. Immunol. 3, 347. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2012.00347

Caruso, C., Accardi, G., Aiello, A., Calabrò, A., Ligotti, M. E., and Candore, G. (2023a). Centenarians born before 1919 are resistant to COVID-19. Aging Clin. Exp. Res. 35 (1), 217 -220. doi:10.1007/s40520-022-02287-6

Caruso, C., Accardi, G., Virruso, C., and Candore, G. (2013). Sex, gender and immunosenescence: a key to understand the different lifespan between men and women? Immun. Ageing 10 (1), 20. doi:10.1186/1742-4933-10-20

Caruso, C., Ligotti, M. E., Accardi, G., Aiello, A., and Candore, G. (2022). An immunologist s ' guide to immunosenescence and its treatment. Expert Rev. Clin. Immunol. 18 (9), 961 -981. doi:10.1080/1744666X.2022.2106217

Caruso, C., Marcon, G., Accardi, G., Aiello, A., Calabrò, A., Ligotti, M. E., et al. (2023b). Role of sex and age in fatal outcomes of COVID-19: women and older centenarians are more resilient. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24 (3), 2638. doi:10.3390/ijms24032638

Caruso, C., and Vasto, S. (2016). ' Immunity and aging, ' in Encyclopedia of immunobiology . Editor M. J. H. Ratcliffe (Oxford: Academic Press), 127 -132.

Casimir, G. J., and Duchateau, J. (2011). Gender differences in in /uniFB02 ammatory processes could explain poorer prognosis for males. J. Clin. Microbiol. 49 (1), 478 -479. doi:10.1128/JCM.02096-10

Charchar, F. J., Bloomer, L. D., Barnes, T. A., Cowley, M. J., Nelson, C. P., Wang, Y., et al. (2012). Inheritance of coronary artery disease in men: an analysis of the role of the Y chromosome. Lancet 379 (9819), 915 -922. doi:10.1016/S01406736(11)61453-0

Conway, J., and Duggal, N. (2021). Ageing of the gut microbiome: potential in /uniFB02 uences on immune senescence and in /uniFB02 ammageing. Ageing Res. Rev. 68, 101323. doi:10.1016/j. arr.2021.101323

Decaroli, M. C., and Rochira, V. (2017). Aging and sex hormones in males. Virulence 8 (5), 545 -570. doi:10.1080/21505594.2016.1259053

Desai, M. K., and Brinton, R. D. (2019). Autoimmune disease in women: endocrine transition and risk across the lifespan. Front. Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 10, 265. doi:10. 3389/fendo.2019.00265

Di Palo, A., Siniscalchi, C., Salerno, M., Russo, A., Gravholt, C. H., and Potenza, N. (2020). What microRNAs could tell us about the human X chromosome. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 77 (20), 4069 -4080. doi:10.1007/s00018-020-03526-7

Dodd, K. C., and Menon, M. (2022). Sex bias in lymphocytes: implications for autoimmune diseases. Front. Immunol. 13, 945762. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2022. 945762

Flanagan, K. L. (2014). Sexual dimorphism in biomedical research: a call to analyse by sex. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 108 (7), 385 -387. doi:10.1093/ trstmh/tru079

Franceschi, C., Salvioli, S., Garagnani, P., de Eguileor, M., Monti, D., and Capri, M. (2017). Immunobiography and the heterogeneity of immune responses in the elderly: a focus on in /uniFB02 ammaging and trained immunity. Front. Immunol. 8, 982. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2017.00982

Fuhler, G. M. (2020). The immune system and microbiome in pregnancy. Best. Pract. Res. Clin. Gastroenterol. 44-45, 101671. doi:10.1016/j.bpg.2020.101671

Furman, D., Hejblum, B. P., Simon, N., Jojic, V., Dekker, C. L., Thiébaut, R., et al. (2014). Systems analysis of sex differences reveals an immunosuppressive role for testosterone in the response to in /uniFB02 uenza vaccination. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111 (2), 869 -874. doi:10.1073/pnas.1321060111

Garnica, M., Aiello, A., Ligotti, M. E., Accardi, G., Arasanz, H., Bocanegra, A., et al. (2022). How can we improve the vaccination response in older people? Part II: targeting immunosenescence of adaptive immunity cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (17), 9797. doi:10. 3390/ijms23179797

Gay, L., Melenotte, C., Lakbar, I., Mezouar, S., Devaux, C., Raoult, D., et al. (2021). Sexual dimorphism and gender in infectious diseases. Front. Immunol. 12, 698121. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2021.698121

Gie /uniFB01 ng-Kröll, C., Berger, P., Lepperdinger, G., and Grubeck-Loebenstein, B. (2015). How sex and age affect immune responses, susceptibility to infections, and response to vaccination. Aging Cell. 14 (3), 309 -321. doi:10.1111/acel.12326

Gisinger, T., Azizi, Z., Alipour, P., Harreiter, J., Raparelli, V., Kublickiene, K., et al. (2023). Sex and gender aspects in diabetes mellitus: focus on access to health care and cardiovascular outcomes. Front. Public Health 11, 1090541. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2023. 1090541

Henze, L., Schwinge, D., and Schramm, C. (2020). The effects of androgens on T cells: clues to female predominance in autoimmune liver diseases? Front. Immunol. 11, 1567. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2020.01567

Hiller-Sturmhöfel, S., and Bartke, A. (1998). The endocrine system: an overview. Alcohol Health Res. World 22 (3), 153 -164.

Hirokawa, K., Utsuyama, M., Hayashi, Y., Kitagawa, M., Makinodan, T., and Fulop, T. (2013). Slower immune system aging in women versus men in the Japanese population. Immun. Ageing 10 (1), 19. doi:10.1186/1742-4933-10-19

Hoffmann, M., Kleine-Weber, H., Schroeder, S., Krüger, N., Herrler, T., Erichsen, S., et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and is blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell. 181 (2), 271 -280. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020. 02.052

Horowitz, J. E., Kosmicki, J. A., Damask, A., Sharma, D., Roberts, G. H. L., Justice, A. E., et al. (2022). Genome-wide analysis provides genetic evidence that ACE2 in /uniFB02 uences COVID-19 risk and yields risk scores associated with severe disease. Nat. Genet. 54 (4), 382 -392. doi:10.1038/s41588-021-01006-7

Hu, B., Guo, H., Zhou, P., and Shi, Z. L. (2021a). Characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19 (3), 141 -154. doi:10.1038/s41579-020-00459-7

Hu, B., Huang, S., and Yin, L. (2021b). The cytokine storm and COVID-19. J. Med. Virol. 93 (1), 250 -256. doi:10.1002/jmv.26232

Huang, Z., Chen, B., Liu, X., Li, H., Xie, L., Gao, Y., et al. (2021). Effects of sex and aging on the immune cell landscape as assessed by single-cell transcriptomic analysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118 (33), e2023216118. doi:10.1073/pnas.2023216118

Human Mortality Database (2023). Mortality. Avaliable at: https://www.mortality. org/Country/Country?cntr=ITA (Accessed June 27, 2023).

Jaillon, S., Berthenet, K., and Garlanda, C. (2019). Sexual dimorphism in innate immunity. Clin. Rev. Allergy Immunol. 56 (3), 308 -321. doi:10.1007/s12016-0178648-x

- Kaur, D., Rasane, P., Singh, J., Kaur, S., Kumar, V., Mahato, D. K., et al. (2019). Nutritional interventions for elderly and considerations for the development of geriatric foods. Curr. Aging Sci. 12 (1), 15 -27. doi:10.2174/ 1874609812666190521110548

Klein, S. L., and Flanagan, K. L. (2016). Sex differences in immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16 (10), 626 -638. doi:10.1038/nri.2016.90

Klein, S. L., Jedlicka, A., and Pekosz, A. (2010). The Xs and Y of immune responses to viral vaccines. Lancet Infect. Dis. 10 (5), 338 -349. doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(10)70049-9

Kutch, I. C., and Fedorka, K. M. (2015). Y-linked variation for autosomal immune gene regulation has the potential to shape sexually dimorphic immunity. Proc. Biol. Sci. 282 (1820), 20151301. doi:10.1098/rspb.2015.1301

Lahita, R. G. (2023). Sex and gender in /uniFB02 uence on immunity and autoimmunity. Front. Immunol. 14, 1142723. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2023.1142723

Li, M., Yao, D., Zeng, X., Kasakovski, D., Zhang, Y., Chen, S., et al. (2019). Age related human T cell subset evolution and senescence. Immun. Ageing 16, 24. doi:10.1186/ s12979-019-0165-8

- Li, X., Li, C., Zhang, W., Wang, Y., Qian, P., and Huang, H. (2023). In /uniFB02 ammation and aging: signaling pathways and intervention therapies. Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 8 (1), 239. doi:10.1038/s41392-023-01502-8
- Ligotti, M. E., Accardi, G., Aiello, A., Aprile, S., Calabrò, A., Caldarella, R., et al. (2023a). Sicilian semiand supercentenarians: identi /uniFB01 cation of age-related T cell immunophenotype to de /uniFB01 ne longevity trait. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 2023, uxad074. doi:10.1093/cei/uxad074

Ligotti, M. E., Accardi, G., Aiello, A., Calabrò, A., Caruso, C., Corsale, A. M., et al. (2023b). Sicilian semiand supercentenarians: age-related NK cell immunophenotype and longevity trait de /uniFB01 nition. Transl. Med. Uni 25, 1041. doi:10.37825/2239-9747.1041

Ligotti, M. E., Accardi, G., Aiello, A., Calabrò, A., Caruso, C., Corsale, A. M., et al. (2023c). Sicilian semiand supercentenarians: identi /uniFB01 cation of age-related T cell immunophenotype to de /uniFB01 ne longevity trait. Clin. Exp. Immunol. , uxad074. doi:10. 1093/cei/uxad074

- Ligotti, M. E., Aiello, A., Accardi, G., Aprile, S., Bonura, F., Bulati, M., et al. (2021a). Analysis of T and NK cell subsets in the Sicilian population from young to supercentenarian: the role of age and gender. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 205 (2), 198 -212. doi:10.1111/cei.13606
- Ligotti, M. E., Pojero, F., Accardi, G., Aiello, A., Caruso, C., Duro, G., et al. (2021b). Immunopathology and immunosenescence, the immunological key words of severe COVID-19. Is there a role for stem cell transplantation? Front. Cell. Dev. Biol. 9, 725606. doi:10.3389/fcell.2021.725606

Liu, L. Y., Schaub, M. A., Sirota, M., and Butte, A. J. (2012). Sex differences in disease risk from reported genome-wide association study /uniFB01 ndings. Hum. Genet. 131 (3), 353 -364. doi:10.1007/s00439-011-1081-y

- Lu, R. J., Taylor, S., Contrepois, K., Kim, M., Bravo, J. I., Ellenberger, M., et al. (2021). Multi-omic pro /uniFB01 ling of primary mouse neutrophils predicts a pattern of sex and agerelated functional regulation. Nat. Aging 1 (8), 715 -733. doi:10.1038/s43587-02100086-8

Maan, A. A., Eales, J., Akbarov, A., Rowland, J., Xu, X., Jobling, M. A., et al. (2017). The Y chromosome: a blueprint for men s ' health? Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 25 (11), 1181 -1188. doi:10.1038/ejhg.2017.128

Márquez, E. J., Chung, C. H., Marches, R., Rossi, R. J., Nehar-Belaid, D., Eroglu, A., et al. (2020). Sexual-dimorphism in human immune system aging. Nat. Commun. 11 (1), 751. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-14396-9

McCarthy, M. (2000). The "gender gap" in autoimmune disease. Lancet 356 (9235), 1088. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(05)74535-9

Min, J., Jo, H., Chung, Y. J., Song, J. Y., Kim, M. J., and Kim, M. R. (2021). Vitamin D and the immune system in menopause: a review. J. Menopausal Med. 27 (3), 109 -114. doi:10.6118/jmm.21011

Moskalev, A., Stambler, I., and Caruso, C. (2020). Innate and adaptive immunity in aging and longevity: the foundation of resilience. Aging Dis. 11 (6), 1363 -1373. doi:10. 14336/AD.2020.0603

Nielsen, J., Nørgaard, S. K., Lanzieri, G., Vestergaard, L. S., and Moelbak, K. (2021). Sex-differences in COVID-19 associated excess mortality is not exceptional for the COVID-19 pandemic. Sci. Rep. 11 (1), 20815. doi:10.1038/s41598-02100213-w

Ochando, J., Mulder, W. J. M., Madsen, J. C., Netea, M. G., and Duivenvoorden, R. (2023). Trained immunity - basic concepts and contributions to immunopathology. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 19 (1), 23 -37. doi:10.1038/s41581-022-00633-5

Oertelt-Prigione, S. (2012). The in /uniFB02 uence of sex and gender on the immune response. Autoimmun. Rev. 11 (6-7), A479 -A485. doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2011.11.022

- Oghumu, S., Varikuti, S., Stock, J. C., Volpedo, G., Saljoughian, N., Terrazas, C. A., et al. (2019). Cutting edge: CXCR3 escapes X chromosome inactivation in T cells during infection: potential implications for sex differences in immune responses. J. Immunol. 203 (4), 789 -794. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1800931

Patin, E., Hasan, M., Bergstedt, J., Rouilly, V., Libri, V., Urrutia, A., et al. (2018). Natural variation in the parameters of innate immune cells is preferentially driven by genetic factors. Nat. Immunol. 19 (3), 302 -314. doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0049-7

Plebani, M., and Lippi, G. (2022). Sex and gender differences in COVID-19: a narrative review. Italian J. Gender-Speci /uniFB01 c Med. 8, 37953. doi:10.1723/0000.37953

Pojero, F., Candore, G., Caruso, C., Di Bona, D., Groneberg, D. A., Ligotti, M. E., et al. (2021). The role of immunogenetics in COVID-19. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22 (5), 2636. doi:10. 3390/ijms22052636

Poulain, M., Chambre, D., and Pes, G. M. (2021). Centenarians exposed to the Spanish /uniFB02 u in their early life better survived to COVID-19. Aging (Albany NY) 13 (18), 21855 -21865. doi:10.18632/aging.203577

Puca, A. A., Spinelli, C., Accardi, G., Villa, F., and Caruso, C. (2018). Centenarians as a model to discover genetic and epigenetic signatures of healthy ageing. Mech. Ageing Dev. 174, 95 -102. doi:10.1016/j.mad.2017.10.004

- Raparelli, V., Norris, C. M., Bender, U., Herrero, M. T., Kautzky-Willer, A., Kublickiene, K., et al. (2021). Identi /uniFB01 cation and inclusion of gender factors in retrospective cohort studies: the GOING-FWD framework. BMJ Glob. Health 6 (4), e005413. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2021-005413
- Regitz-Zagrosek, V., and Gebhard, C. (2023). Gender medicine: effects of sex and gender on cardiovascular disease manifestation and outcomes. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 20, 236 -247. doi:10.1038/s41569-022-00797-4

Restifo, N. (2000). Flu: the story of the great in /uniFB02 uenza pandemic of 1918 and the search for the virus that caused it. Nat. Med. 6, 12 -13. doi:10.1038/71463

Rogers, R. G., Everett, B. G., Onge, J. M., and Krueger, P. M. (2010). Social, behavioral, and biological factors, and sex differences in mortality. Demography 47 (3), 555 -578. doi:10.1353/dem.0.0119

Russell, P. J. (2013). Genetics: a molecular approach . London, United Kingdom: Pearson.

- Schuurhof, A., Bont, L., Siezen, C. L., Hodemaekers, H., van Houwelingen, H. C., Kimman, T. G., et al. (2010). Interleukin-9 polymorphism in infants with respiratory syncytial virus infection: an opposite effect in boys and girls. Pediatr. Pulmonol. 45 (6), 608 -613. doi:10.1002/ppul.21229
- Sciarra, F., Campolo, F., Franceschini, E., Carlomagno, F., and Venneri, M. A. (2023). Gender-speci /uniFB01 c impact of sex hormones on the immune system. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24 (7), 6302. doi:10.3390/ijms24076302

Sharma, S., and Eghbali, M. (2014). In /uniFB02 uence of sex differences on microRNA gene regulation in disease. Biol. Sex. Differ. 5 (1), 3. doi:10.1186/2042-6410-5-3

- Shepherd, R., Cheung, A. S., Pang, K., Saffery, R., and Novakovic, B. (2021). Sexual dimorphism in innate immunity: the role of sex hormones and epigenetics. Front. Immunol. 11, 604000. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2020.604000
- Spach, K. M., Blake, M., Bunn, J. Y., McElvany, B., Noubade, R., Blankenhorn, E. P., et al. (2009). Cutting edge: the Y chromosome controls the age-dependent experimental allergic encephalomyelitis sexual dimorphism in SJL/J mice. J. Immunol. 182 (4), 1789 -1793. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.0803200

Sun, Z., Fan, J., and Wang, Y. (2022). X-chromosome inactivation and related diseases. Genet. Res. (Camb). 2022, 1391807. doi:10.1155/2022/1391807

- Tadiri, C. P., Gisinger, T., Kautzy-Willer, A., Kublickiene, K., Herrero, M. T., Raparelli, V., et al. (2020). The in /uniFB02 uence of sex and gender domains on COVID-19 cases and mortality. CMAJ 192 (36), E1041 -E1045. doi:10.1503/cmaj.200971
- Takahashi, T., Ellingson, M. K., Wong, P., Israelow, B., Lucas, C., Klein, J., et al. (2020). Sex differences in immune responses that underlie COVID-19 disease outcomes. Nature 588 (7837), 315 -320. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2700-3

Taneja, V. (2018). Sex hormones determine immune response. Front. Immunol. 9, 1931. doi:10.3389/ /uniFB01 mmu.2018.01931

Tasher, D., and Dalal, I. (2012). The genetic basis of severe combined immunode ciency and its variants. /uniFB01 Appl. Clin. Genet. 5, 67 -80. doi:10.2147/TACG. S18693

- Thompson, E. E., Nicodemus-Johnson, J., Kim, K. W., Gern, J. E., Jackson, D. J., Lemanske, R. F., et al. (2018). Global DNA methylation changes spanning puberty are near predicted estrogen-responsive genes and enriched for genes involved in endocrine and immune processes. Clin. Epigenetics 10, 62. doi:10.1186/s13148018-0491-2

Tieri, P., Grignolio, A., Zaikin, A., Mishto, M., Remondini, D., Castellani, G. C., et al. (2010). Network, degeneracy and bow tie. Integrating paradigms and architectures to

grasp the complexity of the immune system. Theor. Biol. Med. Model. 7, 32. doi:10.1186/ 1742-4682-7-32

Tieu, S., Charchoglyan, A., Wagter-Lesperance, L., Karimi, K., Bridle, B. W., Karrow, N. A., et al. (2022). Immunoceuticals: harnessing their immunomodulatory potential to promote health and wellness. Nutrients 14 (19), 4075. doi:10.3390/nu14194075

Tracey, G., Olivia, B., Jean, M., Megan, H., and Sagri, S. (2022). Why does gender matter for immunization? Vaccine S0264-410X (22), 01495 -5. doi:10.1016/j. vaccine.2022.11.071

Trevisan, C., Raparelli, V., Malara, A., Abbatecola, A. M., Noale, M., Palmieri, A., et al. (2023). Sex differences in the ef /uniFB01 cacy and safety of SARS-CoV2 vaccination in residents of long-term care facilities: insights from the GeroCovid Vax study. Intern Emerg. Med. 1, 1337 -1347. doi:10.1007/s11739023-03283-y

UNICEF DATA (2023). Monitoring the situation of children and women. Avaliable at: https://data.unicef.org/topic/gender/overview/ (Accessed June 27, 2023).

van der Sluis, R. M., Cham, L. B., Gris-Oliver, A., Gammelgaard, K. R., Pedersen, J. G., Idorn, M., et al. (2022). TLR2 and TLR7 mediate distinct immunopathological and antiviral plasmacytoid dendritic cell responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection. EMBO J. 41 (10), e109622. doi:10.15252/embj.2021109622

Weyand, C. M., and Goronzy, J. J. (2016). Aging of the immune system. Mechanisms and therapeutic targets. Ann. Am. Thorac. Soc. 13 (Suppl. 5), S422 -S428. doi:10.1513/ AnnalsATS.201602-095AW

Xiao, F. H., Chen, X. Q., He, Y. H., and Kong, Q. P. (2018). Accelerated DNA methylation changes in middle-aged men de /uniFB01 ne sexual dimorphism in human lifespans. Clin. Epigenetics 10 (1), 133. doi:10.1186/s13148-018-0573-1

Xirocostas, Z. A., Everingham, S. E., and Moles, A. T. (2020). The sex with the reduced sex chromosome dies earlier: a comparison across the tree of life. Biol. Lett. 16 (3), 20190867. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2019.0867

Zheng, Y., Liu, X., Le, W., Xie, L., Li, H., Wen, W., et al. (2020). A human circulating immune cell landscape in aging and COVID-19. Protein Cell. 11 (10), 740 -770. doi:10. 1007/s13238-020-00762-2