<!-- image -->

## Global Substrate Profiling of Proteases in Human Neutrophil Extracellular Traps Reveals Consensus Motif Predominantly Contributed by Elastase

Anthony J. O'Donoghue 2 ☯ , Ye Jin 1 ☯ , Giselle M. Knudsen 2 , Natascha C. Perera 3 , Dieter E. Jenne 3,4 , John E. Murphy 1 , Charles S. Craik 2 , Terry W. Hermiston 1*

1 US Innovation Center, Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals, San Francisco, California, United States of America, 2 Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, United States of America, 3 Comprehensive Pneumology Center, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease (ILBD), Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Munich, Germany, 4 Max-Planck-Institute of Neurobiology, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

## Abstract

Neutrophil  extracellular  traps  (NETs)  consist  of  antimicrobial  molecules  embedded  in  a  web  of  extracellular  DNA. Formation of NETs is considered to be a defense mechanism utilized by neutrophils to ensnare and kill invading pathogens, and has been recently termed NETosis. Neutrophils can be stimulated to undergo NETosis ex vivo, and are predicted to contain high levels of serine proteases, such as neutrophil elastase (NE), cathepsin G (CG) and proteinase 3 (PR3). Serine proteases are important effectors of neutrophil-mediated immunity, which function directly by  degrading  pathogenic  virulent  factors  and  indirectly  via  proteolytic  activation  or  deactivation  of  cytokines, chemokines and receptors.  In  this  study,  we  utilized  a  diverse  and  unbiased  peptide  library  to  detect  and  profile protease  activity associated  with NETs  induced  by  phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate  (PMA).  We  obtained  a 'proteolytic  signature'  from  NETs  derived  from  healthy  donor  neutrophils  and  used  proteomics  to  assist  in  the identification  of  the  source  of  this  proteolytic  activity.  In  addition,  we  profiled  each  neutrophil  serine  protease  and included the newly identified enzyme, neutrophil serine protease 4 (NSP4). Each enzyme had overlapping yet distinct endopeptidase  activities  and  often  cleaved  at  unique  sites  within  the  same  peptide  substrate.  The  dominant proteolytic activity in NETs was attributed to NE; however, cleavage sites corresponding to CG and PR3 activity were evident. When NE was immunodepleted, the remaining activity was attributed to CG and to a lesser extent PR3 and NSP4.  Our  results  suggest  that  blocking  NE  activity  would  abrogate  the  major  protease  activity  associated  with NETs. In addition, the newly identified substrate specificity signatures will guide the design of more specific probes and inhibitors that target NET-associated proteases.

Citation: O'Donoghue AJ, Jin Y, Knudsen GM, Perera NC, Jenne DE, et al. (2013) Global Substrate Profiling of Proteases in Human Neutrophil Extracellular Traps Reveals Consensus Motif Predominantly Contributed by Elastase. PLoS ONE 8(9): e75141. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0075141

Editor: Michael Glogauer, University of Toronto, Canada

Received May 15, 2013; Accepted August 9, 2013; Published September 20, 2013

Copyright: © 2013 O'Donoghue et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

Funding: The research was funded by Bayer HealthCare and by NIH grant R01CA128765 (CSC). Mass spectrometry was provided by the Bio-Organic Biomedical Mass Spectrometry Resource at UCSF supported by the Biomedical Technology Research Centers program, NIH NIGMS 8P41GM103481 (AL Burlingame). Bayer HealthCare authors were involved in study design, decision to publish, and preparation of the manuscript.

Competing interests: Ye Jin, John E. Murphy and Terry W. Hermiston are employees for Bayer HealthCare. This does not alter our adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in the guide for authors.

- * E-mail: Terry.Hermiston@bayer.com
- ☯ These authors contributed equally to this work.

## Introduction

Neutrophils  are  the  most  abundant  leukocytes  in  plasma. They are the first cells recruited to injury sites in response to pathogen  invasion,  and  they  act  as  the  first  line  of  innate immune defense. Neutrophils have traditionally been considered  effector  cells  for  the  inflammatory  response  and acute immunity, functioning through intracellular phagocytosis, and using lytic proteases, reactive oxygen species and microbicidal proteins to attack infective agents. Recent studies

have shown that neutrophils also have the capacity to regulate the immune response by expressing cytokines, chemokines, Fc receptors and complement components for signaling with other immune cells, such as dendritic cells, B cells and T cells [1].

Proteases  are  important  effectors  of  neutrophils.  They  not only contribute directly to microbicidal activity but also function in  the  proteolytic  processing  of  chemokines,  cytokines  and receptors  [2,3].  This  modulatory  activity  is  exemplified  by  the caspase-independent activation of IL-1β and IL-18 by NE, PR3 and CG [4,5,6] or the conversion of anti-inflammatory

progranulin  to  pro-inflammatory  granulin  by  NE  and  PR3  [7]. Furthermore, NE  has been shown to couple neutrophilmediated inflammation with the coagulation pathway by cleaving tissue factor pathway inhibitor on Neutrophil Extracellular Traps (NETs).

NETs  are  released  by  stimulated  neutrophils  in  a  specific form of cell death called NETosis. NETosis is hypothesized to represent  a  new  mechanism  of  innate  immunity  mediated  by neutrophils in response to pathogen  invasion [8,9]. It is characterized  by  the  formation  of  NETs,  networks  made  of decondensed chromatin and anti-microbial proteins and peptides.  NETosis  represents  a  new  paradigm  of  cell  death that  is  distinct  from  apoptosis  and  necrosis  in  many  aspects. No nuclear fragmentation or membrane blebbing is observed, and  activation  is  independent  of  caspase  activity,  although NADPH  oxidase  is required [10]. NETosis also involves activities of NE and myeloperoxidase [11], histone citrullination by peptidylarginine deiminase 4 [12] and activation of the RafMEK-ERK  pathway  [13].  It  has  been  hypothesized  that  the primary  function  of  NETs  is  to  trap  and  kill  pathogens.  In addition,  it  also  provides  a  matrix  for  establishing  high  local concentrations  of  effectors  and  mediators  for  the  ensuing innate and adaptive immune responses.

Stimulation  of  neutrophils  with  PMA  causes  the  release  of each of the serine proteases NE, PR, CG [14] and NSP4 [15] and the metalloproteases, MMP-8 and MMP-9 [16]. However, only  NE,  PR  and  CG  have  been  found  to  be  associated  with the resulting NET [14]. To characterize NET-associated proteolytic activities in an unbiased manner, proteins trapped in NETs were released and assayed with the Multiplex Substrate Profiling  by  Mass  Spectrometry  (MSP-MS)  method  [17].  This method utilizes a library of 124 highly diversified peptides in a multiplex assay with tandem liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry  for  detection  of  cleavage  sites.  Using  the  MSPMS  assay,  a  proteolytic  signature  was  uncovered  for  each donor  sample  and  compared  to  the  signatures  generated  for each neutrophil serine protease. By deconvolution of the NETs' associated  protease  activities  we  determined  that  the  major activity  was  attributed  to  NE.  Immunodepletion  of  NE  activity revealed  important  contributions  from  PR3  and  to  a  lesser extent CG and NSP4. Identifying the substrate specificity and the  contribution  of  each  NET-associated  protease  to  overall NET-associated  activity  could  lead  to  the  development  of therapeutics  to  alleviate  pathological  NETosis  in  acute  and chronic immune diseases.

## Results

## Induction of NETs with enriched protease activity

NE,  PR3  and  CG  were  previously  identified  in  NETs  and together  were  estimated  to  make  up  ~9%  of  the  total  protein associated with the NETs [14]. To estimate proteolytic activity in PMA-induced NETs generated from healthy donor neutrophils we screened a set of internally quenched fluorescent peptides and identified a substrate that was readily cleaved  by  all  three  enzymes  (Figure  1A,  Figure  S1).  This substrate, K(Mca)-PLGKQVEY-K(Dnp), was previously used to assay  a  glutamic  acid  protease  secreted  from  a  fungus  [18].

Using  this  probe,  the  proteolytic  activity  released  from  NETs derived from PMA and Micrococcal Nuclease (MNase) treated neutrophils  ranged  from  0.047  to  0.068  µmoles/min/mg.  For individual donors this activity was approximately five-fold greater  than  control  samples  that  lack  PMA  treatment,  and twenty-  to  forty-fold  greater  than  control  samples  that  lacked MNase  treatment  (Figure  1B).  These  assays  confirmed  that activated  neutrophils  produce  NETs  that  are  enriched  with proteases that can be released upon nuclease treatment.

## Comparison of substrate signatures of NET associated proteases from donor neutrophils

We employed MSP-MS to generate a substrate signature of proteases associated with NETs from PMA activated neutrophils  and  compared  the  substrate  specificity  for  each donor  sample  (Figure  2A-C).  Each  donor  sample  contained proteases with a distinct preference for isoleucine, valine and threonine  in  the  P1  position  while  arginine,  glutamine  and tryptophan were significantly enriched (p ≤ 0.05) at P4, P3 and P2'  positions,  respectively.  Furthermore,  cleavage  was  rarely observed on the C-terminal side of amino acids with charged side chains with the exception of lysine, while proline is not well tolerated in either the S3, S1 or S1' pockets of these proteases. When  donors  were  directly  compared,  40  shared  cleavage sites  were  identified  and  each  donor  sample  had  between  7 and 11 unique cleaved bonds (Figure 2D). When the location of each  cleavage  site  was  analyzed,  no  hydrolysis  was  evident near  the  N-termini  of  the  tetradecapeptides,  indicating  that these neutrophil derived enzymes  lacked aminopeptidase specificity  (Figure  2E).  However,  cleavage  readily  occurred near the C-termini, indicating the presence of carboxypeptidases or endoproteases that have little specificity at the non-prime side of the scissile bond.

## Identification of NET associated proteins

To identify the full complement of proteins embedded in the NETs,  protein  preparations  from  the  same  NETosis-induced neutrophils described above  were  subjected  to proteomic analysis to evaluate the protein composition of neutrophils after PMA and MNase treatment (Table 1). Using mass spectrometry, 29 proteins were identified in PMA- and MNasetreated  neutrophil  samples,  however  only  NE,  alpha-enolase and  Histones  H2A  and  H3  were  found  to  be  specifically enriched relative to the control samples. Eleven proteins were reproducibly  identified  in  all  three  PMA-  and  MNase-treated donor  samples,  which  included  NE  and  the  inactive  serine protease  family  member,  azurocidin.  Surprisingly,  while  our enzymatic studies indicated an enrichment of proteolytic activity  in  NETs  from  PMA-  and  MNase-treated  neutrophils relative to the control samples, there was little or no enrichment of  proteases  in  the  same  samples  when  analyzed  by  mass spectrometry-based  proteomics.  CG  was  found  in  one  donor sample  while  PR3,  NSP4  and  MMP-8  were  never  observed. Two  peptides  corresponding  to  MMP-9  were  observed  in  a MNase only treated sample.

<!-- image -->

Figure  1. Monitoring  of  proteolytic  activity  in  neutrophil  extracellular  traps. A .  Identification  of  an  internally  quenched fluorescent  substrate  that  is  hydrolyzed  by  NE,  CG  and  PR3. B .  Extracellular  proteolytic  activity  was  analyzed  from  3  donor neutrophils (Donor 1, dark grey; Donor 2, black; Donor 3, light grey) following treatment with PMA, MNase or a combination of both. Proteolytic activity was measured using (K-Amc) PLGKQVEY(K-Dnp). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075141.g001

<!-- image -->

## MSP-MS profiling of NE and comparison to NETs

Based  on  our  proteomic  data,  the  majority  of  proteolytic activity in NETs was predicted to be derived from NE. To test this  prediction,  the  substrate  specificity  of  purified  NE  was profiled using both MSP-MS  and the more established positional  scanning  synthetic  combinatorial  library  (PS-SCL) assay [19]. This enzyme was isolated from human neutrophils and  was  found  to  be  free of other neutrophil or serum proteases using mass spectrometry based proteomic analysis (data not shown). In the PS-SCL assay the P1 site of NE had a distinct preference for valine, alanine, threonine and isoleucine. In  addition,  proline  was  preferred  in  P2,  glutamine,  glutamic acid  and  methionine  in  P3  and  norleucine  in  P4  (Figure  3A). Using the MSP-MS assay, NE had a preference for isoleucine, valine and threonine in the P1 position and had low tolerance for asparagine, lysine and most other amino acids with charged side  chains.  In  addition  arginine,  glutamine,  norleucine  and tryptophan were significantly enriched (p ≤ 0.05) at the P4, P3, P1' and P2' positions, respectively. A Pearson correlation was performed on the NE profiles from the MSP-MS and PS-SCL methods which showed that each non-prime subsite had strong positive correlation with a score of ≥0.4 on a scale from -1.0 to 1.0 (Table 2). This validated the MSP-MS assay as a method

for  profiling  the  substrate  specificity  of  NE  and  other  serine neutrophil serine proteases.

To  generate  a  representative  'donor  signature',  the  40 cleavages observed in all three donor samples were aggregated into a single motif. An advantage of using the MSPMS  assay  over  the  PS-SCL  assay  for  profiling  biological samples is that specific cleavage of peptide substrates can be directly  linked  to  a  protease.  The  cleavage  sites  that  were common to  all  three  donors  were  directly  compared  with  the substrate  profile  of  purified  NE  (Figure  3C)  and  correlated strongly between  P4  and  P3' (Table 2). In addition we determined  that  33  of  the  cleaved  bonds  that  occur  in  donor samples  could  also  be  hydrolyzed  by  NE  (Figure  3C)  which provided evidence that the major proteolytic activity in NETs is derived from NE. However, seven of the cleavage sites could not be directly linked to NE  activity, therefore additional proteases were active on NETs.

## MSP-MS profiling of CG, PR3 and NSP4 and comparison to NETs

CG, PR3 and the newly identified neutrophil serine proteases NSP4  have  been  shown  to  be  released  from  PMA  activated neutrophils  [14,15],  therefore  these  enzymes  were  profiled

Figure  2. Determination  of  the  proteolytic  signatures  in  NETs. A C -.  IceLogos  representing  the  P4  to  P4'  sites  for  NETs isolated  from  three  donor  samples.  Amino  acids  that  are  most  frequently  observed  (above  axis)  and  least  frequently  observed (below axis) are illustrated. The number of cleavage sites used to make each iceLogo are listed in the bottom right-hand corner. Residues that are highlighted in black text are significantly (p = 0.05) enriched relative to the frequency that these same amino acids are found in the peptide library (5.2 +/- 0.5%). The amino acid 'n' corresponds to norleucine. D .  Determination of the number of cleavage sites that are common and unique to each donor sample. E . Positional frequency of all donor-derived cleavage sites within the tetradecapeptides (n=85).

<!-- image -->

doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075141.g002

using MSP-MS to identify the source of the unknown proteolytic activity  in  NETs.  In  the  P1  positions,  PR3  had  approximately equal preference for alanine, valine, threonine and isoleucine, CG favored phenylalanine over tyrosine and lysine, while NSP4 had a strict  preference  for  arginine  (Figure  4A-C).  Outside  of the  P1  subsite,  PR3  showed  selectivity  for  aspartic  acid  and asparagine  at  P2,  and  norleucine,  leucine  and  glycine  at  P4, P3  and  P2',  respectively  while  CG  had  a  preference  for norleucine  at  P2.  In  contrast  to  the  other  neutrophil  serine proteases,  NSP4  specificity  was  so  selective  for  P1  arginine residues that only 19 bonds were cleaved in the library after 20 hours  incubation.  In  order  to  further  characterize  non-prime side specificity, each enzyme was assayed using the PS-SCL method  and  the  P4  to  P1  site  preferences  were  identified (Figure S2).

Using the MSP-MS datasets, a Venn diagram was generated to  highlight  the  unique  and  shared  cleavage  sites  for  each  of the  neutrophil  serine  proteases.  Interestingly,  for  a  family  of enzymes  that  share  high  sequence  identity,  they  have  each evolved to cleave a defined set of unique peptide bonds. When compared to the unknown cleavage sites in NETs, we determined that 5 of the 7 sites were matched to CG while one site was matched to PR3 activity. With the knowledge that CG and PR3 are active in NETs we were now only able to directly

assign 18 of the cleavage sites to NE as many of the sites can be  cleaved  by  more  than  one  neutrophil  serine  protease (Figure 4E). A single unidentified cleavage  site occurred between  valine  and  isoleucine  in  a  peptide  containing  the sequence PHWQRVIFFRLNTP. Although not observed in the individual  enzyme  assays,  cleavage  at  this  P1  valine  site  is likely to be the result of NE, CG or both.

## Immunodepletion of NE from NETs

In order to confirm that NE was the major proteolytic activity in NETs, we selectively removed the enzyme by immunodepletion, and assayed the remaining proteases in the mixture.  On  this  occasion,  we  were  able  to  increase  the  total amount of NE-depleted donor protein in the assay by 15-fold, which resulted in only a 1.7 to 2.3-fold increase in the number of cleavage bonds identified in each donor sample (Figure S3). The NE-depleted donor samples shared 76 cleavage sites and 12 to 16 unique cleaved bonds were identified for each donor (Figure  5).  The  substrate  signature  of  the  shared  cleavage sites  showed  a  preference  for  phenylalanine,  arginine  and lysine  in  the  P1  position,  while  arginine  and  norleucine  were most  often  found  in  P3  and  P2  sites,  respectively.  When compared  to  the individual serine protease datasets, we

Table 1. NET associated proteins identified by LC-MS/MS from three healthy donors.

| UniProt Accession   | Unique Peptides   | Mean Peptide Count (n)   | Number Unique   | Peptide Count   | Number Unique   | Peptide Count   | Protein MW    | Protein Name                                                 |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| B4E335              | 43                | 17.33 (1)                | 97              | 173             | 73              | 141             | 39226.3       | Actin, beta                                                  |
| P05164              | 99                | 97.33 (3)                | 27              | 43              | 35              | 47              | 83869.4       | Myeloperoxidase                                              |
| A8K9U8              | 71                | 41.67 (2)                | 80              | 128             | 43              | 65              | 78338.9       | Lactoferrin                                                  |
| P08246              | 59                | 68.33 (3)                | -               | -               | 36              | 64              | 28518.3       | Neutrophil elastase                                          |
| B4DLA9              | 43                | 42 (1)                   | 14              | 24              | 21              | 47              | 14841.5       | Histone H2B                                                  |
| B2R4P9              | 43                | 54.33 (3)                | -               | -               | -               | -               | 15328         | Histone H3                                                   |
| A3KPC7              | 38                | 39.33 (2)                | -               | -               | -               | -               | 13906.4       | Histone H2A                                                  |
| P20160              | 33                | 32.67 (3)                | 10              | 13              | 12              | 13              | 26885.9       | Azurocidin                                                   |
| B2R4R0              | 30                | 51 (3)                   | 8               | 9               | 20              | 41              | 11367.4       | Histone H4                                                   |
| P35579              | -                 | -                        | 23              | 30              |                 |                 | 226534.2      | Myosin-9                                                     |
| B3KSI4              | 8                 | 2.67 (1)                 | 8               | 11              | 24              | 31              | 58982.1       | Transketolase-like                                           |
| P06733              | 14                | 7.33 (3)                 | -               | -               | 20              | 32              | 47169.4       | Alpha-enolase                                                |
| A3R0T8              | 11                | 7 (3)                    | 18              | 25              | 7               | 12              | 21865.4       | Histone 1, H1e                                               |
| B2R4C5              | 17                | 6.33 (1)                 | 21              | 23              | 18              | 23              | 16537.2       | Lysozyme                                                     |
| P08311              | 15                | 6 (1)                    | 14              | 20              | 10              | 13              | 28837.5       | Cathepsin G                                                  |
| B2R4M6              | 3                 | 1 (1)                    | 14              | 24              | 16              | 28              | 13210.1       | Protein S100-A9                                              |
| P59665              | 14                | 25 (3)                   | 16              | 59              | 13              | 37              | 10201.1       | Neutrophil defensin 1                                        |
| A4UCT1              | 10                | 4.67 (3)                 | 11              | 13              | 14              | 20              | 17303.1       | Glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase                             |
| B2R829              | -                 | -                        | 20              | 27              | -               | -               | 45850.5       | MNDA-like                                                    |
| A2A418              | 4                 | 1.33 (2)                 | 13              | 14              | 13              | 17              | 80641.3       | Gelsolin                                                     |
| C5HZ13              | -                 | -                        | -               | -               | 12              |                 |               |                                                              |
| B4DE36              | 2                 | 1 (2)                    | -               | -               | 8               | 21 10           | 16453 60186.3 | Charcot-Leyden crystal protein Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase |
| P07737              | 3                 | 3 (2)                    | 3               | 3               | 7               | 10              | 15054.4       | Profilin-1                                                   |
| P31146              | 5                 | 1.67 (1)                 | -               | -               | 11              | 22              | 51026.7       | Coronin-1A                                                   |
| A8K4W6              | -                 | -                        | 7               | 8               | 9               | 11              | 44615.1       | Phosphoglycerate kinase                                      |
| B4DNK4              | -                 | -                        | 6               | 7               | -               | -               | 49898.2       | Pyruvate kinase                                              |
| P80723              | -                 | -                        | 6               | 6               | 3               | 3               | 22693.6       | Brain acid soluble protein 1                                 |
| B0YJC4              | -                 | -                        | -               | -               | 10              | 16              | 49653.8       | Vimentin                                                     |
| B4E112              | -                 | -                        | 3               | 6               | 4               | 7               | 12459.7       | Cofilin-1-like                                               |
| A2VCK8              | 4                 | 4 (2)                    | 8               | 25              | 5               | 22              | 5052.7        | Thymosin beta 4, X-linked                                    |
| P12724              | -                 | -                        | 6               | 7               | -               | -               | 18385.5       | Eosinophil cationic protein                                  |
| P05109              | 5                 | 2.67 (3)                 | 3               | 5               | 7               | 9               | 10834.6       | Protein S100-A8                                              |
| A8K220              | -                 | -                        | 3               | 4               | 4               | 7               | 18012.7       | Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase                          |
| A8MX94              | -                 | -                        | -               | -               | 3               | 3               | 19480.7       | Glutathione S-transferase P                                  |
| F2Z393              | 1                 | 0.33 (1)                 | -               | -               | 4               | 4               | 35329.2       | Transaldolase                                                |
| B4DJI2              | -                 | -                        | 4               | 6               | 1               | 2               | 56853.5       | Granulins-like                                               |
| A8K2Y9              | -                 | -                        | -               | -               | 5               | 6               | 53140.5       | 6-P gluconate dehydrogenase                                  |
| P49913              | -                 | -                        | 4               | 4               | -               | -               | 19301.6       |                                                              |
|                     |                   |                          |                 |                 |                 | -               |               | Cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide                           |
| O60234              | 1                 | 0.33 (1)                 | 3               | 3               | -               |                 | 16801.5       | Glia maturation factor gamma                                 |
| D6R9A6              | 1                 | 0.67 (1)                 | 6               | 14              | -               | -               | 15403.9       | High mobility group box 2                                    |
| A8K2L4              | -                 | -                        | 3               | 4               | 1               | 1               | 37247.9       | LSP1-like                                                    |

Table 1 (continued).

| UniProt Accession   | Unique Peptides   | Mean Peptide Count (n)   | Number Unique   | Peptide Count   | Number Unique   | Peptide Count   |   Protein MW | Protein Name             |
|---------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|--------------|--------------------------|
| P80511              | 2                 | 1 (1)                    | -               | -               | -               | -               |      10575.1 | Protein S100-A12         |
| B3KUI1              | 1                 | 1.33 (3)                 | 3               | 4               | 3               | 4               |      25043.3 | Plastin-2-like           |
| B5BU38              | -                 | -                        | -               | -               | 3               | 4               |      38680.6 | Annexin                  |
| A7XZE4              | -                 | -                        | 2               | 3               | 3               | 3               |      33026.2 | Beta tropomyosin isoform |
| Q5T123              | 3                 | 1.67(2)                  | 2               | 3               | -               | -               |       9380.6 | SH3BGRL3                 |
| P05204              | -                 | -                        | 3               | 8               | 2               | 11              |       9392.7 | HMGN2                    |
| B0QZK8              | -                 | -                        | 2               | 2               | -               | -               |      13683.9 | HP1BP3                   |
| B7Z507              | -                 | -                        | -               | -               | 2               | 2               |      71554.8 | MMP9-like                |
| Q68D08              | -                 | -                        | -               | -               | 2               | 2               |      36750.3 | DKFZp686B04128           |

The number of unique peptide counts corresponds to the total number of unique peptide sequences that identify a protein entry. The peptide count is the number of peptide

spectra observations for a given protein, either reported as the mean across three replicate experiments or individually for the control experiments.

doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075141.t001

Figure 3. Substrate specificity profiling of human Neutrophil Elastase A. Positional scanning of the P4 to P1 subsites of NE using the PS-SCL assay. B An iceLogo illustrating amino acids that are most frequently (above axis) and least frequently (below axis) observed in the P4 to P4' sites of NE. Residues that are highlighted in black are significantly (p = 0.05) enriched or de-enriched in  the  subsites  relative  to  the  frequency  that  these  same  amino  acids  are  found  in  the  peptide  library  (5.2  +/-  0.5%). C .  A representative 'donor signature' consisting of 40 cleavage sites that are common to the three donors. D . A pie chart representing the 40 cleavage sites that are common to the donor samples. 33 of these sites are also hydrolyzed by NE. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075141.g003

<!-- image -->

determined that 36 of the 76 cleavage sites were attributable to CG activity. In addition, PR3 and NSP4 accounted for 7 and 1 cleaved bonds, respectively, while the protease(s) responsible

for 15 cleavage sites could not be determined. The successful depletion  of  NE  was  evident  by  the  presence  of  a  single  NE cleaved bond, however, it is possible that cleavage at this site

Figure 4. Determination of proteolytic signature of PR3, CG and NSP4. A C -.  IceLogos representing the P4 to P4' sites for PR3, CG and NSP4. Amino acids that are most frequently observed (above axis) and least frequently observed (below axis) are illustrated. The number of cleavage sites used to make each iceLogo are listed in the bottom right-hand corner. Residues that are highlighted in black text are significantly (p ≤ 0.05) enriched relative to the frequency that these same amino acids are found in the peptide library (5.2 +/- 0.5%). The amino acid 'n' corresponds to norleucine. D .  A  4-way venn diagram illustrating the number of unique  and  overlapping  peptide  bonds  that  are  cleaved  by  each  neutrophil  serine  protease. E .  A  pie  chart  representing  the  40 cleavage sites that are common to the donor samples. 'Shared' corresponds to cleavage sites that are derived from more than one neutrophil serine protease.

<!-- image -->

doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075141.g004

Table  2. Comparison  of  NE  substrate  specificity  using MSP-MS with NET Donors and NE using PS-SCL.

|             |   P4 |   P3 |   P3 |   P1 | P1'   | P2'   | P3'   | P4'   |
|-------------|------|------|------|------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| NE (PS-SCL) | 0.5  | 0.82 | 0.41 | 0.65 | -     | -     | -     | -     |
| Donors      | 0.63 | 0.85 | 0.7  | 0.95 | 0.69  | 0.79  | 0.58  | 0.34  |

Pearson  correlation  values  of  &lt;0.4  indicate  weak  or  no  correlation  while  values

≥0.4 and ≥0.7 represent strong and very strong correlation, respectively.

doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075141.t002

is due to an unidentified low abundance protease with overlapping specificity. In addition, hydrolysis of the PHWQRVIFFRLNTP peptide at the V-I site was not evident in the NE-depleted samples indicating that the cleavage site was the product of NE activity.

Taken  together,  we  have  utilized  a  novel  substrate  based profiling  method  to  determine  that  NE  and  to  a  lesser  extent CG and PR3 are active in neutrophil derived NETs. In addition, by selectively removing NE we have been able to perform an in-depth  characterization  of  less  abundant  proteolytic  activity

and determined that NSP4 and at least one other protease are also active in NETs.

## Discussion

The formation of neutrophil extracellular traps is a novel host defense strategy in addition to the well characterized phagocytosis  of  neutrophils.  Many  groups  have  shown  that viruses [20], bacteria [8] and fungi [21,22] stimulate neutrophils to  release  extracellular  DNA,  although  it  has  been  suggested that this process is an incidental component of neutrophil lysis or a hijacking of host pathways by the pathogen [23]. However, there is increasing evidence that NETosis is a highly orchestrated mechanism of cellular defense and is under tight control [24]. Irrespective of the mechanism by which chromatin and other cytotoxic components are released from neutrophils and assembled into NETs, the resultant damage to host tissue has  been  shown  to  promote  inflammatory  diseases  such  as cystic fibrosis [25], asthma [26], systemic vasculitis [7], systemic  lupus  erythematosus  [27,28]  and  other  acute  and chronic  diseases  [9,29].  In  unstimulated  neutrophils,  a  set  of homologous serine proteases are stored in azurophilic

Figure 5. Determination of the proteolytic signatures in NE-depleted NETs. A . After immunodepletion of NE from donor NET samples,  the  MSP-MS  assay  was  performed  at  15-fold  higher  total  protein  concentration.  A  total  of  153  cleaved  bonds  were identified  in  the  3  donor  samples  and  76  cleaved  bonds  were  common  to  each  donor. B .  An  iceLogo  illustrating  the  proteolytic signature of cleavage sites that are common to each NE-depleted donor. C . A pie chart representing the 76 cleavage sites that are common to  the  donor  samples.  'Shared'  corresponds  to  cleavage  sites  that  are  derived  from  more  than  one  neutrophil  serine protease.

<!-- image -->

doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075141.g005

granules and their enzymatic activities are subject to intracellular  compartmentalization  and  endogenous  inhibitors [30]. Upon stimulation with PMA or bacteria they are released and  selectively  associated  with  extracellular  DNA  [14,31].  As extracellular  proteins,  the  activity  of  these  enzymes  may  no longer be under the control of inhibitors and, therefore, unregulated  proteolysis  could  be  initiated and  prolong  an inflammatory response [32]. Alternatively, association of these proteases with NETs could provide a means to compartmentalize  and  minimize  their  destructive  proteolytic activities.  It  is  worth  noting  that  serine  proteases  seem  to  be selectively targeted to NETs since caspases that are important components  of  inflammasomes,  and  matrix  metalloproteases were not detected on NETs. One simple explanation is that NE, CG and PR3 are positively charged basic proteins which have high  affinity  to  the  negatively  charged  DNA.  Previous  studies by Dubois and colleagues have used highly selective fluorescent  substrates  of  NE,  PR3  and  CG  to  assess  the proteolytic  activity  in  NETs  from  Cystic  Fibrosis  sputum  and from neutrophils stimulated with S.  aureus and P.  aeruginosa [25]. DNase treatment of sputum dramatically increased its NE activity, but  not  the  activities  of  CG  and  PR3.  They  also determined that nuclease treatment of extracellular DNA from stimulated  neutrophils  caused  a  ~2.5  fold  increase  in  soluble proteolytic  activity  relative  to  unstimulated  cells,  and  that  the contribution of each enzyme  to the overall activity was approximately  40%  for  NE,  40%  for  PR3  and  20%  for  CG. Their  study  demonstrated  that  NETs  are  enriched  in  serine proteases  and  NE  and  PR3  are  main  contributors  to  NETs associated proteolytic activity.

In  our  study,  we  utilized  a  highly  sensitive  and  unbiased substrate profiling method to characterize the entire proteolytic signature associated with NETs. MSP-MS is an ideal technology to profile complex biological samples because the substrate population consists of a defined set of peptides and, therefore,  cleavage  sites  can  be  directly  linked  to  a  specific enzyme. Furthermore, the unbiased design of the peptides and combination into equimolar pools ensures  that proteolytic

activity from multiple proteases can be monitored simultaneously without prior knowledge of the substrate specificity.  The  reproducibility  of  both  the  sample  preparation and the MSP-MS assay was evident as many of the peptides cleaved in three independent donor samples in this study were identical. Any  variation between  donors  could  be  due  to differences  in  genetic  background,  or  immune  status  of  each individual. Inter-individual variability has recently been highlighted by Barrientos and coworkers, where NETassociated  proteolytic  activity  between  donors  differed  by  as much as 9-fold [33].

In our study, all of the proteolytic activity released from PMAactivated  neutrophils  could  be  attributed  to  NE,  CG  and  PR3 activity. However, ~70% of cleavage sites were likely to be the result  of  NE  activity  and  CG  and  PR3  contributed  to  the remaining  25%  and  5%,  respectively.  As  expected,  when  NE was immunodepleted from the NET extracts, CG became the dominant source of proteolytic activity. The remaining proteolytic activity was likely to be the product of PR3 and to a lesser extent NSP4  and other as yet unidentified NET associated proteases. Interestingly, PMA stimulation of neutrophils resulted in PR3 activity that was considerably lower than CG while other studies using bacterial stimulated neutrophils show the reverse. These data indicate that protease  composition  in  NETs  may  differ  depending  on  the type  of  stimulation.  Khandpur  and  coworkers  analyzed  the composition in NETs following alternate stimulation and found differences  in  both  the  protein  levels  and  protein  composition [33,34].

Proteomic  analysis  was  used  to  identify  proteins  released from  the  NETs,  many  of  which  have  been  observed  in  a previous  study  [14].  Interestingly,  we  found  that  NE  is  tightly bound  to  DNA  and  was  not  found  in  samples  that  lacked nuclease treatment. CG was found in all samples independent of treatment regimes while PR3 and NSP4 were not detected. Since  robust  PR3  activity  was  evident  in  the  MSP-MS  assay these data indicate that a functional activity assay has superior

sensitivity than proteomic based methods for detecting proteases.

Previously,  Proteomic  Identification  of  Protease  Cleavage Sites (PICS)  was  utilized  to generate  extended  substrate specificity  profiles  of  NE,  CG  and  NSP4  [15,35].  In  these studies, proteome derived peptides were used as the substrate library  and  cleavage  by  the  neutrophil  serine  proteases  was monitored by mass spectrometry. As was observed for the PSSCL  method, the substrate profiles using PICS  strongly correlated  with  our  MSP-MS  data  (Table  S1).  However,  our study is the first to directly compare the substrate specificity of all four homologous neutrophil serine proteases under identical assay  and  instrumentation  conditions,  and  reveals  distinct cleavage sites that are uniquely cut by each enzyme. Traditionally,  the  neutrophil  serine  proteases  were  considered to have  redundant  functionalities  based  on  their  ability  to hydrolyze structural proteins such as collagen, laminin, fibronectin and elastin [30]. However, out of the 180 bonds that were hydrolyzed by the four proteases only 28 cleavage sites were shared between  two or more  enzymes.  Therefore, although our substrate profiling was performed using a synthetic  peptide  library,  it  is  likely  that  many in  vivo protein substrate cleavage sites exist that are unique to each neutrophil protease.

Successful substrate prediction tools require an experimentally determined list of protein or peptide substrates to identify sequence  and  structural  features  important  for protease recognition. The  predictive power  for identifying natural  substrates  can  be  improved  by  incorporating  negative substrates. Using the MSP-MS assay, any peptide bond that is cleaved  by  a  neutrophil  serine  protease  is  a  true  substrate while  every  bond  that  is  not  cleaved  is  considered  a  true negative substrate. Using data generated in this study it may be  possible  to  identify  and  track  endogenous  substrates  of these  proteases  during  neutrophil  lysis  and/or  NET  formation which will provide us with a greater understanding of roles of these enzymes in immune response and inflammation.

In this study, it is evident that targeting of NE on NETs could minimize adverse effects of unregulated proteolysis associated with tissue damage and inflammation. The selective cleavage sequences of the neutrophil serine proteases identified in this study  will be  valuable  for  designing  substrates,  inhibitors, activity based  imaging  agents  [36]  and  protease-activated prodrugs  [37].  In  addition,  the  substrate  signature  of  NETsassociated protease activity can be monitored as a biomarker for  inflammatory  diseases  driven  by  extracellular  neutrophil proteases.

## Materials and Methods

## Ethics statement

All data were analyzed anonymously and all aspects of this study were conducted according to the principles expressed in the  Declaration  of  Helsinki.  Human  subject  research  approval for this study  was  received  from  the  Western  Institutional Review  Board  (study  No:  1084207).  All  participants  provided written informed consent prior to the start of the study.

## Isolation of neutrophils from healthy donors

Human neutrophil cells were isolated by a two-step purification protocol using Red Blood Cell (RBC) sedimentation followed by removal of monocytes using Ficoll density gradient centrifugation. Briefly, 50 ml of fresh human whole blood was collected  in  a  collection  tube  containing  heparin.  Blood  was mixed with HetaSep (STEM cell, Cat #  07906) at the ratio (5:1) to  precipitate RBCs and platelets. Supernatants with enriched leukocytes  and  monocytes  were  layered  on  top  of  FicollPAQUE PLUS (GE Healthcare, Cat #  17-1440-03). After Ficoll gradient centrifugation, neutrophils were separated from monocytes  in  the  supernatant  and  pelleted.  Contaminating RBCs were further removed by repeated cell lysis using RBC lysis buffer (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat  130-094-183). By this method, # 50-100  million  neutrophils  were  isolated  to  greater  than  98% purity, as confirmed by flow cytometry using CD66b antibodies (BD Pharmamingen, Cat# 555724).

## NETosis induction and NET preparation

Purified neutrophils were  washed  five  times  to  remove plasma proteins, then seeded at a density of 1.7 x 10 6  cells/ml in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with glutamine in a 10 mm culture  plate.  NETosis  was  induced in vitro by  stimulating neutrophils with 50 nM phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA, Sigma P8139) at 37°C in a 5% CO  incubator. After induction 2 for  3  hours,  media  was  removed  and  plates  were  washed gently with warm media for three times. The induction time was selected  for  maximum  protein  release  from  NETs  after  PMA treatment. NETs were then digested by Micrococcal Nuclease (MNase)  (20  U/ml)  (Thermo  Scientific,  Cat # 88216)  for  10-40 minutes and released into media. The supernatant was subsequently  centrifuged  to  remove  cells  and  cellular  debris. Supernatants from PMA-untreated neutrophils and PMAtreated neutrophils but without MNase digestion were prepared as  negative  controls.  A  fraction  of  each  sample  was  treated with  protease  inhibitor  cocktail  to  preserve  the  sample  for proteomic  analysis,  whereas  the  remainder  of  the  sample  for protease  activity screening  was  not  treated  with  protease inhibitors. Progression of NETosis was monitored by measuring cell-free DNA using Sytox Orange (Life Technologies, S11368). DNA was quantified by relative fluorescence measurement with a SpectraMax M2 fluorometer (Molecular Devices) at a filter setting of 544 nm (ex)/ 590 nm (em)  and  calibrated  by  standard  curve  with  DNA  standard  of known concentration. NETosis was also visually examined by confocal  immunofluorescent  microscopy.  Neutrophils  (5  x  10 5 cells/ml) were seeded on poly-L-lysine coated cover slips and treated  with  or  without  50  nM  PMA.  At  different  time  points post-NETosis induction, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde,  then  permeablized  and  blocked  with  10% FBS  in  phosphate  buffered  saline  (PBS)  with  0.05%  Triton X-100. For histone staining,  coverslips  were  incubated  with  a mouse  anti-human core histone antibody (Millipore, Antihistone Clone H11-4, MAB3422) followed a Tetramethyl Rhodamine Isothiocyanate (TRITC)-conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen Cat #  T2762). DNA was counterstained with Hoechst  33342  (AnaSpec  Inc,  Cat #   83218).  Coverslips  were

mounted onto glass slides using Prolong Gold mounting media (Invitrogen Cat # P36930) before acquisition.

## Determination of neutrophil serine protease activity

Human  neutrophil  serine  proteases  were  purchased  from Athens Research &amp; Technology. A set of internally quenched fluorescent substrates (40 µM each) were assayed with 20 nM of NE (Cat #  16-14-051200), CG (Cat #  16-14-030107) and PR3 (Cat # 16-14-161820) in Dulbecco's-PBS containing 0.01% Tween-20 at room temperature. Triplicate assays were performed  in  96-well  plates  in  a  Spectra  Max  Gemini  EM (Molecular Devices) using a λ ex 328nm and λ em 393 nm. Initial velocities  (relative  fluorescent  units/s)  were  calculated  using SoftMax Pro software (Molecular Devices). NET samples were prepared  as  described  above  from  three  donors  with  the following combinations: +PMA/+MNase, +PMA/-MNase, and PMA/+MNase  treatment.  2  µg/ml  of  each  NET  sample  was assayed  in  triplicate  with  40  µM  of  (K-Mca)  PLGKQVEY(KDnp). Initial velocities were converted to µmole/min/mg.

## Peptide cleavage site identification by multiplex substrate profiling-mass spectrometry

Recombinant NSP4 was expressed and isolated from HEK 293 cells as described previously [15]. NE (1 nM), CG (5 nM), PR3 (2 nM) and NSP4 (25nM) were profiled using the MSP-MS assay  in  Dulbecco's-PBS  as  described  previously  [17].  In addition, proteolytic activities in three PMA-induced and MNase-treated donor NET samples were determined using the MSP-MS  assay.  Control  samples  lacked  PMA  or  MNase treatment  and  consisted  of  an  equal  mixture  of  total  protein from  each  donor.  All  assays  contained  0.4  µg/mL  of  donor protein and 500 nM of each peptide in a total reaction volume of 900 µl. Aliquots were removed after 15, 60, 240, and 1200 minutes and quenched with concentrated formic acid to a final pH of 2.5. Samples were desalted and analyzed by LC-MSMS peptide sequencing.

For  LC-MS/MS,  an  LTQ-FT  mass  spectrometer  (Thermo) equipped  with  a  10,000  psi  system  nanoACUITY  (Waters) UPLC instrument was used for reversed phase chromatography  with  a  C18  column  (BEH130,  1.7  µm  bead size, 100 µm x 100 mm). The LC was operated at 600 nL/min flow rate, and peptides were separated using a linear gradient over 42 min from 2% B to 30% B, with solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B: 0.1%  formic acid in 70% acetonitrile.  Survey  scans  were  recorded  over  350-1800  m/z range, and MS/MS was performed with CID fragmentation on the  six  most  intense  precursor  ions.  Mass  spectrometry  peak lists were generated using in-house software called PAVA, and data  were  searched  using  Protein  Prospector  software  v. 5.10.0 [38]. Data was searched against a database containing the sequences of the 124 14-mer synthetic peptides, concatenated with 4 different copies of randomized sequences for  the  same  124  entries  to  create  a  final  database  of  620 sequences  for  estimation  of  false  discovery  rate  [39].  For database searching, peptide sequences were matched with no enzyme  specificity requirement,  and  variable modifications including oxidation of Trp, Pro and  Phe,  and  N-terminal pyroGlu  from  Gln.  Protein  Prospector  score  thresholds  were

selected to be minimum protein score of 20, minimum peptide score  of  15,  and  maximum  expectation  values  of  0.1  for 'protein'  and  0.05  for  peptide  matches,  and  resulted  in  a peptide  false  discovery  rate  of  0.2%.  Cleavage  site  data  was extracted  from  Protein  Prospector  using  an  in  house  script called 'MSP extractor' software. The earliest time interval that ≥2.5%  (n=41)  of  all  possible  bonds  in  the  library  (n  =  1612) were cleaved was chosen to compare enzymes specificity. NE, PR3  and  CG  reached  this  value  after  240,  1200  and  60 minutes incubation, respectively while NSP4 cleaved only 1.2% (n=19) of peptide bonds after 1200 minutes. For comparison of substrate specificity, an iceLogo software was used to generate substrate  specificity  logos  for  amino  acids  at  ±4  positions adjacent to the identified cleavage sites [40].

## Protein identification of NETs by mass spectrometry

Protein identification in NET-induced samples was performed using peptide sequencing by mass spectrometry as previously reported [17]. The +PMA/+MNase  treated samples were assayed individually for each donor, while the +PMA/-MNase, and -PMA/+MNase control samples were prepared as pooled mass-matched  samples  from  the  three  donors.  NET  protein concentrations  ranged  from  25-40  µg/ml  in  PBS,  therefore  a slightly modified  in  solution  trypsin  digestion  protocol  was applied  as  follows.  Samples  were  brought  to  a  standardized concentration of 30 µg/ml with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (~20 µg in a total volume of 700 µl) to which solid urea was added to 4M final. Sample was reduced with 10 mM DTT incubation  for  10  min  at  56  °C,  then  alkylated  with  12  mM iodoacetamide (45 min, dark, 21 °C), and then quenched with 5 mM additional DTT. The final volume was adjusted to 1.4 ml with additional 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, bringing urea concentration  to  2M.  Trypsin  (sequencing  grade,  Promega) was added at 1:50 trypsin: total protein for digestion overnight at 37 °C. The sample was then acidified with formic acid to pH 2-3 and desalted using C18 OMIX tips (Varian). Each sample was assayed with two technical replicate LC-MS/MS analyses using an LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo) mass spectrometer operated under identical separation and analysis conditions as the LTQFT system described above.

Database searches were performed against the H.  sapiens UniProt  database  (downloaded  March  21,  2012),  containing 62,611  entries.  For  estimation  of  false  discovery  rate,  this database  was  concatenated  with  a  fully  randomized  set  of sequence entries [36]. Data were searched with mass tolerances of 20 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Peptide  sequences  were  matched  as  tryptic  peptides  with  no missed  cleavages,  and  carbamidomethylated  cysteines  as  a fixed modification. Variable modifications included oxidation of Met, N-terminal pyroGlu from Gln, loss of Met and N-terminal acetylation. Protein Prospector score parameters were: minimum  protein  score  of  22,  minimum  peptide  score  of  15, and maximum expectation values of 0.01 for protein and 0.001 for peptide matches, resulting in a protein false discovery rate of 1.1%. Protein identification results are reported with unique peptide  count,  peptide  count  as  an  approximation  of  protein abundance,  percent  sequence  coverage  and  an  expectation value  for  the  probability  of  the  protein  identification  [38,39].

Proteins were required to have been identified with at least two unique peptides in one of the three conditions tested (+PMA/ +MNase, +PMA/-MNase, and -PMA/+MNase) to be reported.

## Proteolytic activity using combinatorial fluorogenic substrate libraries

Non-prime  side sequence  specificity, as the N-terminal sequence  relative  to  the  scissile  bond  is  termed  in  protease nomenclature, was assayed for proteases using combinatorial fluorogenic  substrate  libraries  [19].  This  fluorescent  peptide library is amenable  for  detailed  profiling  of  purified  serine proteases  and  distinguishes  between  subsite  preferences  in closely  related  enzymes.  Human  NE  (50  nM),  CG  (100  nM), PR3  (50  nM)  and  NSP4  (100  nM)  were  assayed  with  this fluorogenic library in Dulbecco's-PBS containing 0.01% Tween-20.  Amino  acid  preferences  at  each  position  can  be determined by direct comparison of activity, in units of picomolar of fluorophore released per second.

## Depletion of elastase from NET supernatants

MNase  preparations  of NET  samples  were  secondarily digested  with  DNase  (100U/ml)  for  10  minutes  at  37°  to  fully release NET-associated proteins. NET supernatants were then mixed with Pierce G/A magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific, Cat # 88802) coated with elastase antibodies (Sigma, Cat # PAI-74132) at 4 °C for 1 hour. After incubation, the supernatants were separated from beads on a DYNAL-magnet bead separation rack (Invitrogen Cat #  123-21D).

## Supporting Information

Figure  S1. Screening  of  a  set  of  internally  quenched fluorescent  peptides  to  identify  a  substrate  that  can  be cleaved  by  NE  (blue),  PR3  (yellow)  and  CG  (green). All sequences  have  a  N-terminal  lysine(Mca)  group  and  a  Cterminal lysine(Dnp). (TIF)

Figure  S2. Substrate  specificity  of  human  neutrophil serine proteases using the P4-P1 complete diverse positional scanning synthetic combinatorial library. The x

## References

- 1. Mantovani A, Cassatella MA, Costantini C, Jaillon S (2011) Neutrophils in  the  activation  and  regulation  of  innate  and  adaptive  immunity.  Nat Rev Immunol 11: 519-531. doi:10.1038/nri3024. PubMed: 21785456.
- 2. Pham  CT  (2006)  Neutrophil  serine  proteases:  specific  regulators  of inflammation. Nat Rev  Immunol  6: 541-550. doi:10.1038/nri1841. PubMed: 16799473.
- 3. Meyer-Hoffert U, Wiedow  O  (2010)  Neutrophil serine proteases: mediators of innate immune responses. Curr Opin Hematol. PubMed: 21042214
- 4. Guma  M,  Ronacher  L,  Liu-Bryan  R,  Takai  S,  Karin  M  et  al.  (2009) Caspase  1-independent  activation  of  interleukin-1beta  in  neutrophilpredominant inflammation. Arthritis Rheum 60: 3642-3650. doi: 10.1002/art.24959. PubMed: 19950258.
- 5. Joosten  LA,  Netea  MG,  Fantuzzi  G,  Koenders  MI,  Helsen  MM  et  al. (2009) Inflammatory arthritis in caspase 1 gene-deficient mice: contribution  of  proteinase  3  to  caspase  1-independent  production  of bioactive interleukin-1beta. Arthritis Rheum 60: 3651-3662. doi: 10.1002/art.25006. PubMed: 19950280.

axis  indicated  the  amino  acids  held  constant  at  each  position with 'n' representing norleucine. All assays were performed in triplicate  and  the y axis  indicates  fluorescence  released  per second  relative  to  the  highest  fluorescence  observed  for  the enzyme at a single fixed position. (TIF)

Figure S3. Determination of the proteolytic signatures in NE-depleted NETs. A C -. IceLogos representing the P4 to P4' sites for NE-depleted NETs isolated from three donor samples. Amino  acids  that  are  most  frequently  observed  (above  axis) and least frequently observed (below axis) are illustrated. The numbers  of  cleavage  sites  used  to  make  each  iceLogo  are listed in the bottom  right-hand  corner.  Residues  that  are highlighted  in  black  text  are  significantly  (p  =  0.05)  enriched relative  to  the  frequency  that  these  same  amino  acids  are found in the peptide library (5.2 +/- 0.5%). The amino acid 'n' corresponds to norleucine.

(TIF)

Table  S1. Comparison  of  NE,  PR3  and  NSP4  substrate specificity using MSP-MS and PICS. (DOCX)

## Acknowledgements

We thank Drs. Chris Haskell and Richard Harkins from Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals, US Science Hub for establishing and coordinating this collaboration between Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals  and  UCSF.  Human  neutrophils  purification and  FACS  analysis  were  supported  by  technical  help  from Yaoqi  Chen  and  Dr.  Pedro  Paz.  Jim  Newgren  coordinated collection  of  human  blood  at  the  Bayer  Nurse  Station.  Mass spectrometry  was  provided  by  the  Bio-Organic  Biomedical Mass Spectrometry Resource at UCSF.

## Author Contributions

Conceived  and  designed  the  experiments:  TH  YJ  CSC  JEM AJO. Performed the experiments: AJO YJ GMK. Analyzed the data:  AJO  YJ  GMK.  Contributed  reagents/materials/analysis tools: NCP DEJ. Wrote the manuscript: AJO YJ.

- 6. Robertson  SE,  Young  JD,  Kitson  S,  Pitt  A,  Evans  J  et  al.  (2006) Expression  and  alternative  processing  of  IL-18  in  human  neutrophils. Eur  J Immunol  36:  722-731.  doi:10.1002/eji.200535402.  PubMed: 16506286.
- 7. Kessenbrock K, Krumbholz M, Schönermarck U, Back W, Gross WL et al.  (2009)  Netting  neutrophils  in  autoimmune  small-vessel  vasculitis. Nat Med 15: 623-625. doi:10.1038/nm.1959. PubMed: 19448636.
- 8. Brinkmann V, Reichard U, Goosmann C, Fauler B, Uhlemann Y et al. (2004) Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria. Science 303: 1532-1535. doi:10.1126/science.1092385. PubMed: 15001782.
- 9. Remijsen Q, Kuijpers TW, Wirawan E, Lippens S, Vandenabeele P et al. (2011) Dying  for a cause: NETosis,  mechanisms  behind  an antimicrobial  cell  death  modality.  Cell  Death  Differ  18:  581-588.  doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.1. PubMed: 21293492.
- 10. Rada  B,  Jendrysik  MA,  Pang  L,  Hayes  CP,  Yoo  DG  et  al.  (2013) Pyocyanin-enhanced neutrophil extracellular trap formation requires the NADPH  oxidase.  PLOS  ONE  8:  e54205.  doi:10.1371/journal.pone. 0054205. PubMed: 23342104.
- 11. Papayannopoulos  V,  Metzler  KD,  Hakkim  A,  Zychlinsky  A  (2010) Neutrophil  elastase  and  myeloperoxidase  regulate  the  formation  of neutrophil extracellular traps. J Cell Biol 191: 677-691. doi:10.1083/jcb. 201006052. PubMed: 20974816.
- 12. Leshner M, Wang S, Lewis C, Zheng H, Chen XA et al. (2012) PAD4 mediated histone hypercitrullination induces heterochromatin decondensation and chromatin unfolding to form neutrophil extracellular trap-like structures. Front Immunol  3:  307.  PubMed: 23060885.
- 13. Hakkim  A,  Fuchs  TA,  Martinez  NE,  Hess  S,  Prinz  H  et  al.  (2011) Activation  of  the  Raf-MEK-ERK  pathway  is  required  for  neutrophil extracellular  trap  formation.  Nat  Chem  Biol  7:  75-77.  doi:10.1038/ nnano.2011.228. PubMed: 21170021.
- 14. Urban  CF,  Ermert  D,  Schmid  M,  Abu-Abed  U,  Goosmann  C  et  al. (2009)  Neutrophil  extracellular  traps  contain  calprotectin,  a  cytosolic protein  complex  involved  in  host  defense  against  Candida  albicans. PLOS Pathog 5: e1000639. PubMed: 19876394.
- 15. Perera  NC,  Schilling  O,  Kittel  H,  Back  W,  Kremmer  E  et  al.  (2012) NSP4, an elastase-related protease in human neutrophils with arginine specificity.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A  109:  6229-6234.  doi:10.1073/ pnas.1200470109. PubMed: 22474388.
- 16. Jönsson S, Lundberg A, Kälvegren H, Bergström I, Szymanowski A et al. (2011) Increased levels of leukocyte-derived MMP-9 in patients with stable angina pectoris. PLOS ONE 6: e19340. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0019340. PubMed: 21559401.
- 17. O'Donoghue AJ, Eroy-Reveles AA, Knudsen GM, Ingram J, Zhou M et al.  (2012)  Global  identification  of  peptidase  specificity  by  multiplex substrate  profiling.  Nat  Methods  9:  1095-1100.  doi:10.1038/nmeth. 2182. PubMed: 23023596.
- 18. O'Donoghue AJ, Mahon CS, Goetz DH, O'Malley JM, Gallagher DM et al. (2008) Inhibition of a secreted glutamic peptidase prevents growth of the  fungus  Talaromyces  emersonii.  J  Biol  Chem  283:  29186-29195. doi:10.1074/jbc.M802366200. PubMed: 18687686.
- 19. Harris  JL,  Backes  BJ,  Leonetti  F,  Mahrus  S,  Ellman  JA  et  al.  (2000) Rapid and general profiling of protease specificity by using combinatorial fluorogenic substrate libraries. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97: 7754-7759. doi:10.1073/pnas.140132697. PubMed: 10869434.
- 20. Saitoh T, Komano J, Saitoh Y, Misawa T, Takahama M et al. (2012) Neutrophil  extracellular  traps  mediate  a  host  defense  response  to human immunodeficiency virus-1. Cell Host Microbe 12: 109-116. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2012.05.015. PubMed: 22817992.
- 21. Bruns S, Kniemeyer O, Hasenberg M, Aimanianda V, Nietzsche S et al. (2010) Production of extracellular traps against Aspergillus fumigatus in vitro  and  in  infected  lung  tissue  is  dependent  on  invading  neutrophils and  influenced  by  hydrophobin  RodA.  PLOS  Pathog  6:  e1000873. PubMed: 20442864.
- 22. Bianchi  M,  Niemiec  MJ,  Siler  U,  Urban  CF,  Reichenbach  J  (2011) Restoration of anti-Aspergillus defense by neutrophil extracellular traps in human  chronic granulomatous disease after gene therapy is calprotectin-dependent. J Allergy Clin Immunol 127: 1243-1252 e1247 doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2011.01.021. PubMed: 21376380.
- 23. Lu  T,  Kobayashi  SD,  Quinn  MT,  Deleo  FR  (2012)  A  NET  Outcome. Front Immunol 3: 365. PubMed: 23227026.
- 24. Yipp BG, Petri B, Salina D, Jenne CN, Scott BN et al. (2012) Infectioninduced NETosis is a dynamic process involving neutrophil multitasking in vivo. Nat Med  18:  1386-1393.  doi:10.1038/nm.2847.  PubMed: 22922410.
- 25. Dubois  AV,  Gauthier  A,  Bréa  D,  Varaigne  F,  Diot  P  et  al.  (2012) Influence  of  DNA  on  the  activities  and  inhibition  of  neutrophil  serine

- proteases  in  cystic  fibrosis  sputum.  Am  J  Respir  Cell  Mol  Biol  47: 80-86. doi:10.1165/rcmb.2011-0380OC. PubMed: 22343221.
- 26. Dworski  R,  Simon  HU,  Hoskins  A,  Yousefi  S  (2011)  Eosinophil  and neutrophil extracellular DNA traps in human allergic asthmatic airways. J Allergy Clin Immunol 127: 1260-1266. doi:10.1016/j.jaci. 2010.12.1103. PubMed: 21315435.
- 27. Lande R, Ganguly D, Facchinetti V, Frasca L, Conrad C et al. (2011) Neutrophils activate plasmacytoid dendritic cells by releasing self-DNApeptide complexes in systemic lupus erythematosus. Sci Transl Med 3: 73ra19. PubMed: 21389263.
- 28. Garcia-Romo GS, Caielli S, Vega B, Connolly J, Allantaz F et al. (2011) Netting  neutrophils  are  major  inducers  of  type  I  IFN  production  in pediatric  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Sci  Transl  Med  3:  73ra20. PubMed: 21389264.
- 29. Remijsen Q, Vanden Berghe T, Wirawan E, Asselbergh B, Parthoens E et  al. (2011)  Neutrophil  extracellular  trap  cell  death  requires  both autophagy  and  superoxide  generation.  Cell  Res  21:  290-304.  doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.150. PubMed: 21060338.
- 30. Korkmaz B, Moreau T, Gauthier F (2008) Neutrophil elastase, proteinase 3 and cathepsin G: physicochemical properties, activity and physiopathological functions. Biochimie 90: 227-242. doi:10.1016/ j.biochi.2007.10.009. PubMed: 18021746.
- 31. Bréa D, Meurens F, Dubois AV, Gaillard J, Chevaleyre C et al. (2012) The  pig  as  a  model  for  investigating  the  role  of  neutrophil  serine proteases  in  human  inflammatory  lung  diseases.  Biochem  J  447: 363-370. doi:10.1042/BJ20120818. PubMed: 22860995.
- 32. Stoller JK, Aboussouan LS (2005) Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency. Lancet 365: 2225-2236. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66781-5. PubMed: 15978931.
- 33. Barrientos L, Marin-Esteban V, de Chaisemartin L, Le-Moal VL, Sandre C  et  al.  (2013)  An  improved  strategy  to  recover  large  fragments  of functional human neutrophil extracellular traps. Front Immunol 4: 166. PubMed: 23805143.
- 34. Khandpur  R,  Carmona-Rivera  C,  Vivekanandan-Giri  A,  Gizinski  A, Yalavarthi S et al. (2013) NETs are a source of citrullinated autoantigens  and  stimulate  inflammatory  responses  in  rheumatoid arthritis. Sci Transl Med 5: 178ra140. PubMed: 23536012.
- 35. Schilling O, Overall CM (2008) Proteome-derived, database-searchable peptide libraries for identifying protease cleavage sites. Nat Biotechnol 26: 685-694. doi:10.1038/nbt1408. PubMed: 18500335.
- 36. Edgington  LE,  Verdoes  M,  Bogyo  M  (2011)  Functional  imaging  of proteases: recent advances in the design and application of substratebased  and  activity-based  probes.  Curr  Opin  Chem  Biol  15:  798-805. doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.10.012. PubMed: 22098719.
- 37. Choi KY, Swierczewska M, Lee S, Chen X (2012) Protease-activated drug  development.  Theranostics  2:  156-178.  doi:10.7150/thno.4068. PubMed: 22400063.
- 38. Chalkley  RJ,  Baker  PR,  Medzihradszky  KF,  Lynn  AJ,  Burlingame  AL (2008)  In-depth  analysis  of  tandem  mass  spectrometry  data  from disparate  instrument  types.  Mol  Cell  Proteomics  7:  2386-2398.  doi: 10.1074/mcp.M800021-MCP200. PubMed: 18653769.
- 39. Elias  JE,  Gygi  SP  (2007)  Target-decoy  search  strategy  for  increased confidence in large-scale protein identifications by mass spectrometry. Nat Methods 4: 207-214. doi:10.1038/nmeth1019. PubMed: 17327847.
- 40. Colaert N, Helsens K, Martens L, Vandekerckhove J, Gevaert K (2009) Improved  visualization  of  protein  consensus  sequences  by  iceLogo. Nat Methods 6: 786-787. doi:10.1038/nmeth1109-786. PubMed: 19876014.