<!-- image -->

## Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor Induces Expression of Heparin-Binding Epidermal Growth Factor-Like Growth Factor/Diphtheria Toxin Receptor and Sensitivity to Diphtheria Toxin in Human Neutrophils

By Fabrizio Vinante, Martina Marchi, Antonella Rigo, Patrizia Scapini, Giovanni Pizzolo, and Marco A. Cassatella

Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF) is a widely expressed EGF superfamily member that induces mitogenic and/or chemotactic activities toward different cell types through binding to EGF receptors 1 or 4. Membrane-bound HB-EGF exerts growth activity and adhesion capabilities and possesses the unique property of being the receptor for diphtheria toxin (DT). Using molecular and functional techniques, we show that human polymorphonuclear granulocytes (PMN), which did not express HB-EGF in resting conditions, expressed it at mRNA and protein level, following incubation with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Other classic agonists for PMN (including lipopolysaccharide, phagocytable particles, tumor necrosis factora , or G-CSF) failed to induce HB-EGF. The effects of GM-CSF on HB-EGF mRNA levels

were concentration-dependent, reached a plateau after 1 to 2 hours of stimulation, and did not require protein synthesis. After GM-CSF treatment, membrane-bound HB-EGF was detected by flow cytometry. At the same time, PMN acquired sensitivity to the apoptosis-promoting effect of DT, which, moreover, specifically suppressed the GM-CSF-induced priming of formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine-stimulated superoxide anion release. Finally, soluble HB-EGF was detected in the PMN culture medium by a specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Thus, we provide evidence that HBEGF is specifically inducible by GM-CSF in PMN and represents a novel peptide to be included in the repertoire of PMN-derived cytokines.

r 1999 by The American Society of Hematology.

N EUTROPHIL POLYMORPHONUCLEAR granulocytes (PMN) act as the first line of defense against invading xis on endothelial cells d astrocytes, and growth activity micro-organisms, representing the predominant infiltrating cell ome epithelial cells. 1 Interestingly, membrane-bound type in the cellular phase of the acute inflammatory response. -EGF has the unique property of acting as the receptor for 1 Although mature PMN are terminally differentiated cells and e diphtheria toxin (DT), protein synthesis inhibitor capable have generally been considered as lacking RNA/protein synthe-triggering apoptotic death on target cells.expressis capacity, convincing studies have clearly shown that PMN on are capable of producing a variety of cytokines under appropri- EGF ate circumstances. uman PMN may release pro- and anti2 H inflammatory cytokines, including the interleukin-1 1 ) a (ILa and IL-1 , b tumor necrosis factor- TNFa ( a ), IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra), and chemokines such as IL-8, macrophage otein, and produce both the membrane-bound and soluble inflammatory protein-1 (MIP-1 a a ) and MIP-1 b , growthrelated gene product- (GRO a a ), and others. Remarkably, 3 PMN have also been shown to express cytokines involved in processes such as angiogenesis, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), 6 4GRO b , 7 and interferon- inducible g protein-10 (IP-10), well as in cell proliferation and fibrosis, 9.5%) 8 as such as transforming growth factor- GF a (T a ),and TGF 9 b 1, 10,11 less conventionally related to PMN functions. On the whole, ors, as previously described. e granulocyte populations usually these and other data present PMN as candidate regulatory cells in conditions such as wound healing, neoplastic growth, and even degenerative lesions. 3 and chemotactic effects on fibroblasts SMC, 15 and 12,26,27 chemota 27 an 28 for s 12,20,2 HB th 29 a of 30 CD9 co si enhances the mitogenic activity of membrane-bound HB31 as well as the sensitivity to DT. 32 In this study, we analyzed whether human PMN express HB-EGF. We show that, after incubation with GM-CSF, PMN express amounts of HB-EGF mRNA, synthesize the related pr HB-EGF forms. We also provide evidence for a functional significance of PMN-derived HB-EGF. MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell purification and culture. Highly purified granulocytes ( . 9 and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated under endotoxin-free conditions from buffy coats of healthy don 33 Th

a From the Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of Hematology, and the Department of Pathology, Section of General Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

Submitted April 2, 1999; accepted July 7, 1999.

Supported by grants from MURST (60% funds and ''cofinanziamento MURST-Universita 40%''), Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul ' Cancro (AIRC, Milano, Italy) and Progetto Sanita 97, Fondazione ' 96/ Cassa di Risparmio VR-VI-BL-AN (Verona, Italy).

Address reprint requests to Fabrizio Vinante, MD, Cattedra di oEmatol gia, Policlinico GB Rossi, 37134 Verona, Italy; e-mail: VINANTE@ borgoroma.univr.it; Marco A. Cassatella, MD, Patologia Generale, 37134 Verona, Italy; e-mail: MCNCSS@BORGOROMA.UNIVR.IT.

The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked ''adverin accordance with 18 U.S.C. section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

r 1999 by The American Society of Hematology. 0006-4971/99/9409-0021$3.00/0

Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF) is heavily glycosylated EGF superfamily member of approximately 22 kD, originally identified in human macrophages and U937 monocytic cell line conditioned medium,and ex12,13 pressed in a wide range of cell types, including monocytes, 13,14 CD4 1 lymphocytes, 5 1 eosinophils, myeloid leukemia blasts, 16 17 vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC), and endothelialand 18 19 normal 20 or neoplastic epithelial cells. though HB-EGF 12,21 Al can be released from the cell membrane through proteolytic mechanisms, 22 multiple mRNA species for HB-EGF are produced, 3 2 including transcripts corresponding to a short HB-EGF form lacking intramembrane and intracytoplasmic domains. tisement'' 24 Membrane-bound and soluble HB-EGF bind to EGF receptors 1 (HER-1) and 4 (HER-4), 13,14,25 eliciting different biological responses, ,25 12 including adhesion activities, h mitogenic 12 bot

contained less than 4% eosinophils, as shown by May-Gru ldnwa Giemsa staining. In selected experiments, granulocytes were depletedL purified rabbit anti-HB-EGF polyclonal H6 antibody (kindly of eosinophils according to the method described by Koenderman et rovided by Dr S. Higashiyama, Osaka, Japan)or 1 hour at 4°C al. 4 3 Immediately after purification, cells were suspended in RPMI-1640llowed by a biotinylated second antibody [goat F(ab i-rabbit IgG medium supplemented with 10% low-endotoxin (6 pg/mL) fetal calf , serum (FCS) (Seromed; Biochrom KG, Berlin, Germany) and treated at 4°C and, after washing, by phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated streptaviwith one of the following: 25 ng/mL granulocyte-macrophage colony-in (Becton Dickinson, Sunnyvale, CA) for 15 minutes at 4°C. Freshly stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (Genetics Institute, Boston, MA), 100 olated PMN (3 ng/mL lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (from Escherichia coli , serotype 026:B6; Sigma, St Louis, MO), 5 ng/mL TNFa (Peprotech, Rocky Hill, NJ), heat-killed yeast particles opsonized with IgG (Y-IgG) at a odies (MoAbs) for 30 minutes at 4°C. Irrelevant purified rabbit Ig particle/cell ratio of 2:1, 10 nmol/L formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylala- type nine (fMLP; Sigma), 1,000 U/mL G-CSF (Granulokine; Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 100 U/mL interferon- N- ) (Hoffmanng (IF g La Roche), 1,000 U/mL IFNa (Peprotech), 15 ng/mL IL-3 (Peprotech), 10 ng/mL IL-5 (Peprotech), 100 U/mL IL-10 (kindly provided by Dr K. bated for the times indicated with or without GM-CSF in the presence or Moore, DNAX and Schering-Plough, Palo Alto, CA), 100 ng/mL IL-12 (Peprotech), 100 ng/mL IL-15 (Genzyme, Cambridge, MA), 300 nmol/L staurosporin (Sigma), 100 µmol/L dexamethasone (DEX) ined (Sigma), or 20 µg/mL cycloheximide (CHX) (Sigma). In many experi- apoptotic ments we also stimulated PMN with optimal concentrations (0.5thers.PMN were harvested, washed twice with PBS, and suspended ng/mL) of GM-CSF purchased from Peprotech. All reagents used were in 1.5 mL hypotonic fluorochrome solution (propidium iodide 50 µg/mL the highest available grade and were dissolved in pyrogen-free water for1% sodium citrate and 0.1% Triton X-100). The mixture was placed clinical use. Cells were plated either in 24-well tissue culture plates dark overnight at 4°C. The fluorescence of each nucleus was (Nunc, Roskilde, Denmark) at 3 10 6 /mL, or at 5 to 8 3 3 10 6 /mL in polystyrene flasks (Greiner, Nurtingen, Germany), or at 3mL in 3 10 6 / 96-well tissue culture plates (Greiner) and subsequently incubated at ashed 37°C, 5% CO 2 atmosphere. After culture for the appropriate times (see ined using May-Gruwald-Giemsa. Cells were scored as apoptotic below), cells were either extracted for total RNA or used for functionals nonapoptotic, based on diminution of cell volume and chromatin assays. Cell-free supernatants (SN) were harvested and stored condensation yielding fragmented homogeneously stained nuclei. at 2 20°C. In selected experiments, the U937 cell line (monocytic leukemia-derived)was also used. 35 minutes at 4°C with 5% human serum and stained with 10 µL of 100 µg/m p 32 f fo 8 ) 2 ant (Caltag, Burlingame, CA) preadsorbed with human IgG] for 30 minutes d is 3 10 6 /mL) were incubated with 10 µL PE-conjugated anti-CD9 (SBA, Birmingham,AL) or fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)conjugated anti-HER-1 (Medac, Hamburg, Germany) monoclonal antib or iso FITC- or PE-conjugated (Immunotech, Westbrook, MA) MoAbs were used as controls. Flow cytometry analysis was performed on a FACScan (Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA). DT-induced apoptosis. Aliquots of 1 3 10 6 /mL PMN were incuabsence of 10 11 2 to 10 2 8 highly purified DT (kindly provided by Dr E. Papini, CNR Center for Biomembranes, Padua, Italy) and then examfor cell apoptosis by two distinct methods. (1) Analysis of (hypodiploid) nuclei by flow cytometry, as described by o 39 in 0. in the measured using an XL-Coulter flow cytometer (Coulter, Hialeah, FL). (2) Analysis of apoptotic cell morphology. A quantity of 0.5 3 10 6 PBS-w PMN were centrifuged for cytospin preparations and sta n versu 40

HB-EGF and HER-4 RT-PCR. HB-EGF probe generation. A quantity of 4 µg of RNA from the cells of interest was transcribed as previously described.NA was amplified using the 17,37 cD following primers (Genenco, M-medical, Florence, Italy). (1) HB-EGFd 468 nm. Nanomoles of O2 sense 5-TGGTGCTGAAGCTCTTTCTGG-3 8 8 and antisense 5 8 -GTGGGAATTAGTCATGCCCAA-3 8 give a fragment of 605 bp (complete form of HB-EGF) or a fragment 23 of 605 1 94 bp (short form of HB-EGF). 24 (2) HER-4 sense 5 -AGATGGAGGTTTTGCTGCTGAACA-3 8 8 and antisense 5TTA8 -CACCACAGTATTCCGGTGTCT-3 8 (726-bp fragment).(3) Vimen38 tin sense 5 -GCTCAGATTCAGGAACAGCAT-3 8 8 and antisense - 5 8 TAAGGGCATCCACTTCACAGG-3 8 (266-bp fragment). The cDNA was denatured for 5 minutes at 94°C before 35 runs in a thermal cyclerre (GeneAmp PCR System 2400; Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CT) using 1.25 agarose gel. HB-EGF cDNA amplified from the U937 cell line using the primers specified above was analyzed for theI (Life Technologies, Sma fragments of 388 and 217 bp), and was sequenced (Sequenase 2.0U937 cells or PBMC and PMN stimulated or not with GM-CSF or LPS sequencing kit; USB, Cleveland, OH) as a plasmid insert (TA cloning ere generated for Northern blot analysis.

RNA isolation and Northern blot analysis. Total RNA from PMN and PBMC was extracted and analyzed by Northern blot (10 µg of RNA per lane) as previously described. ilters were hybridized using an96-well plates. After a 2- or 21-hour incubation, 100 µL of Hanks' 17,36 F HB-EGF cDNA probe obtained as described below, IL-1ra, IL-6, and Balanced b -actin cDNA fragments labeled with P using a Ready-to-go DNA 32 labeling kit (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden). reversere then incubated at 37°C in an automated EL34 microplate reader ; these primers were designed to derived superoxide anion, 0.5 to 1 ng/mL HB-EGF (R&amp;D System, Measurement of superoxide anion (O) 2 2 generation. This was performed as previously described. iefly, 100 µL of PMN suspen41 Br sion (3 3 10 6 /mL) containing or not GM-CSF or LPS in the presence or absence of 10 8 2 mol/L DT were added to tissue-culture polystyrene Salt Solution (HBSS), containing 1 mmol/L CaCl 10 2 , mmol/L glucose, 4 mmol/L NaN 3, and 160 µmol/L cytochrome C, with or without stimulus (100 nmol/L fMLP) in the presence or not of superoxide dismutase (SOD), were added on top to each well. Plates w (Biotec Instruments, Highland Park, UT) to record absorbance at 550 an 2 were calculated using an extinction coefficient of 24.5 mmol/L.n selected experiments for neutrophil42 I Minneapolis, MN) was used either as a direct triggering agonist or as a priming agent.

U of Taq polymerase (Perkin Elmer, Branchburg, NJ) in 50 µL (94°C 40 8.5 for 8 hours at room temperature, and incubated overnight at 4°C seconds, 57°C 40 seconds, 72°C 50 seconds) followed by 5 minutes at with 100 µL/well of blocking buffer (20 mmol/L TBS, pH 7.4, 3% 72°C. The PCR products were separated by electrophoresis on 1.5% bovine serum albumin [BSA]). After extensive washings with TBS, pH Rockville, MD) restriction site (which gave the expected HB-EGF y a 2-hour incubation at 37°C. SN collected after a 21-hour culture of kit; Invitrogen, San Diego, CA), from which the HB-EGF probe was supplemented with 1% low-endotoxin FCS were used after approxiFlow cytometric analysis. A quantity of 1 3 10 6 /mL PMN cultured for 21 hours in the presence or absence of GM-CSF or LPS was washed and incubated in 100 µL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 30 R&amp;D System) (0.5 µg/mL in TBS, 0.05% Tween 20, 0.1% BSA) and Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for HB-EGF. Soluble HB-EGF protein was measured in the cell-free SN using a specific ELISA developed in our laboratory, according to a method recently published. Briefly, 43 flat-bottomed 96-well plates (MaxiSorp; Nunc) we coated with 50 µL/well of 2 µg/mL polyclonal anti-HB-EGF antibody (R&amp;D System) in 50 mmol/L sodium bicarbonate buffer, pH 7.4, 0.05% Tween 20 (washing buffer), 50 µL/well of either HB-EGF standards (R&amp;D System) or cell-free culture SN were added, followed b w used undiluted. SN of PMN previously cultured in medium mately 80-fold concentration (by the Centricon Plus 20 device from Amicon Inc, Beverly, MA). Plates were rinsed with washing buffer before addition of 50 µL/well of biotinylated anti-HB-EGF antibody (

incubated for 1.5 hours at room temperature. After extensive washings of the plates, streptavidin-conjugated alkaline phosphatase, 1:10,000 (Life Technologies) with TBS containing 0.5% BSA and 0.05% Tween 20, was added and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. After washing, a chromogenic reaction was performed using the ELISA Amplification System (Life Technologies), according to the manufacturer's protocol. Assays were carried out in duplicate. The reaction was stopped with 0.3 mol/L H 4 2 SO and the absorbance at 490 nm was measured. This ELISA had a detection limit of 6.25 pg/mL, and did not cross-react with 100 ng/mL IP-10, 100 ng/mL IL-8, 1 ng/mL MIP-1 a , 10 ng/mL GRO a , 10 ng/mL IFN- , 5 ng/mL IL-10, 10 ng/mL g IL-1 , 10 ng/mL TNFb a , or 10 ng/mL GM-CSF other than EGF, TGF a , and HGF. 43

Statistical analysis. Student's -test, the Mann-Whitney U test, and t analysis of variance according to Kruskall-Wallis ANOVA by ranks were used. Differences were considered statistically significant when the P value was , .05.

## RESULTS

Table 1. Effect of Various Agonists on HB-EGF mRNA Induction in PMN

| Medium               |   2 |
|----------------------|-----|
| LPS                  |   2 |
| TNF- a               |   2 |
| IL-3                 |   2 |
| IL-5                 |   2 |
| IL-10                |   2 |
| IL-12                |   2 |
| IL-15                |   2 |
| G-CSF                |   2 |
| GM-CSF               |   1 |
| IFN- a               |   2 |
| IFN- g               |   2 |
| fMLP                 |   2 |
| IgG-opsonized yeasts |   2 |
| Staurosporin         |   2 |
| Dexamethasone        |   2 |
| Cycloheximide        |   2 |

these cells were initially cultured for 2 hours in the presence or PMN agonists, listed in Table 1, also failed to induce total RNA was processed for Northern blot analysis. Autolo- ltured for up to 21 hours in the presence or absence of IFNgous PBMC were also stimulated under identical experimental data not shown), a cytokine which usually primes PMN for an detectable MN exhibited a considerable accumulation of HB-EGF tranOther HB-EGF steady-state mRNA levels in PMN, even if PMN were cu g ( enh gene expression. By 3 contrast, GM-CSF-treated P scripts as well as IL-1ra mRNA. 45

GM-CSF-induced HB-EGF mRNA in PMN. To investigate whether amounts of HB-EGF mRNA were expressed in PMN, absence of 100 ng/mL LPS and 25 ng/mL GM-CSF, and then conditions, for the purposes of comparison. Figure 1 shows that anced resting and LPS-treated PMN did not express HB-EGF mRNA. The effectiveness of LPS-stimulation was confirmed by its ability to upregulate the IL-1ra mRNA levels. 44

Fig 1. Comparative ability of PMN and PBMC to express HB-EGF mRNA when stimulated with GM-CSF. GM-CSF induced HB-EGF transcripts in PMN and, more dramatically, in PBMC, while LPS, which upregulated IL-1ra in PMN and IL-6 in PBMC, was ineffective on HB-EGF mRNA production. PBMC presented also a costitutive, low production of HB-EGF mRNA. Purified populations of PMN and PBMC from the same donor were cultured with or without 25 ng/mL GM-CSF and 100 ng/mL LPS for 2 hours and then total RNA was extracted and Northern blot analysis for HB-EGF, IL-1ra, IL-6, and actin mRNA was performed. Ten micrograms of total RNA was loaded on each gel lane. The experiment depicted is representative of 4.

<!-- image -->

PMN

PBMC

the

HB-EGF accumulation pattern in PMN and PBMC. Kinetic experiments showed that maximal levels of HB-EGF mRNA occurred after 1 to 2 hours of GM-CSF stimulation (Fig 2A), whereas dose-response studies indicated that highest HB-EGF mRNA accumulation in PMN could be obtained after stimulation with 25 ng/mL of GM-CSF (Fig 2B). A different pattern of HB-EGF mRNA accumulation was observed in PBMC, which not only presented low but constitutive HB-EGF transcripts in all donors examined (n ), but 5 4 dramatically responded to GM-CSF stimulation (Fig 1), producing, as observed for other cytokines,HB-EGF transcripts 2 more than PMN did.

the

to

Genuine expression of HB-EGF by PMN. PBMC expressed several HB-EGF mRNA species, in agreement with earlier studies. ,46 23 As illustrated in Figs 2 and 3, at least 2 HB-EGF mRNA species were induced by GM-CSF in PMN, the most abundant being the 2.7-kb size transcript, a pattern matching that observed in PBMC. Furthermore, IL-6 mRNA was expressed only in LPS-stimulated PBMC and not in PMN, according to published data,thus excluding contamination 47,48 with mononuclear cells (Fig 1). Also consistent with genuine ability of PMN to express HB-EGF mRNA in response to GM-CSF were 3 additional experiments in which complete depletion of eosinophils, which have also been reported express HB-EGF in a rat experimental model, did 16 not influence the accumulation of HB-EGF mRNA in GM-CSFtreated PMN (data not shown). Taken together, our data rule out the possibility that the results obtained in PMN with respect to HB-EGF mRNA levels can be attributed to contamination with mononuclear cells or eosinophils.

Protein-synthesis-independent induction of HB-EGF mRNA in PMN. We also examined whether de novo protein synthesis was necessary for the GM-CSF-driven induction of HB-EGF

Fig 2. HB-EGF mRNA levels in GM-CSF-treated PMN. (A) Time-course. PMN were incubated with 25 ng/mL GM-CSF. At the time-points indicated, total mRNA was extracted and analyzed for HB-EGF, IL-1ra, and actin mRNA expression. The experiment depicted is representative of 2. (B) Dose-dependence. PMN were stimulated with increasing doses of GM-CSF for 2 hours and then total RNA was extracted and analyzed for HB-EGF, IL-1ra, and actin mRNA expression. The experiment depicted is representative of 2.

<!-- image -->

efficiently upregulated HB-EGF surface expression in monocyte

not

HB-EGF ACTIN Membrane-bound HB-EGF demonstration by flow cytometry on GM-CSF-treated PMN. To determine whether GM-CSFtreated PMN expressed the membrane-bound HB-EGF molecule, they were investigated by flow cytometry using a specific rgo purified anti-HB-EGF polyclonal antibody.As shown in Fig 4A,suggests that this process may be substantially delayed if cells resting PMN were negative for HB-EGF. GM-CSF proved to be an efficient inducer of membrane-bound HB-EGF surfacecytokines, or, conversely, that it may be accelerated if cells are expression in cultured PMN (Fig 4B), while LPS was not (as incubated, for instance, with anti-CD95 antibodies. fore, expected from the Northern blot data) (Fig 4C). Surface sought to determine whether the presence of DT in the HB-EGF expression, however, was detectable when PMN were cultured with GM-CSF for longer than 6 hours. GM-CSF also DT-induced apoptosis in GM-CSF-treated PMN. To evaluate whether the membrane-bound HB-EGF molecule expressed on GM-CSF-treated PMN was functionally active, we tested PMN sensitivity to DT. DT represents a ligand of membranebound HB-EGF and induces apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner on HB-EGF-expressing cells. 30 Although PMN un29, de constitutive apoptosis when aged ex vivo, evidence are cultured in the presence of GM-CSF, LPS, IFN-nd other g , a 49 There we cultures of GM-CSF-treated PMN inhibited the protective effect of GM-CSF on PMN apoptosis 50 as a consequence of the GM-CSF-induced surface expression of HB-EGF acting as a DT receptor. To test this hypothesis, we measured the rates of PMN apoptosis by analyzing apoptotic (hypodiploid) nuclei and cell morphology. Figure 5 illustrates a representative experiment performed using flow cytometry to quantify the apoptotic nuclei of PMN, while Table 2 summarizes the data from all our experiments. Apoptosis of PMN after a 44-hour culture period was 34% 6 9% (n 5 5), and this percentage was significantly affected by the presence of DT (35.7% 5%, 6 1 n 5 5) in the culture medium. IFN- and, more effectively, g GM-CSF were found to exert a significant protective effect on PMN apoptosis. By contrast, 10 mol/L 2 8 DT completely suppressed ( P , .05) the protective effect of GM-CSF (Fig 5 and Table 2), but not that of IFN- Table g ( 2). Preliminary dose-response experiments in the range of 10 o 10 2 11 t 2 8 mol/L DT concentrations showed that 10 mol/L 2 8 DT displayed maximal suppression of the protective GM-CSF-mediated effect on PMN apoptosis (data not shown). Therefore, 10 2 8 mol/L DT was used in all subsequent experiments. GM-CSFtreated PMN also displayed sensitivity to the apoptosispromoting effects of DT at morphological examination (Fig 6).

DT-mediated suppression of GM-CSF priming on PMN respiratory burst capacity. To determine whether the apoptosispromoting effects of DT were selective or accompanied by other biological effects, additional experiments were performed to assess the respiratory burst capacity of PMN cultured with

mRNA in PMN. As shown in Fig 3, this was not the case. The inhibitor of protein synthesis CHX not only did not inhibit, but s (data not shown). actually superinduced the GM-CSF-dependent upregulation of HB-EGF mRNA, in a similar way to previous observations in monocytes stimulated with LPS for 1 hour. 46

Fig 3. Effects of CHX on HB-EGF mRNA levels in GM-CSF-treated PMN. CHX did not inhibit, but overinduced, the GM-CSF-dependent upregulation of HB-EGF mRNA, showing that protein synthesis was not required. PMN were pretreated with 20 m g/mL CHX before stimulation with 25 ng/mL GM-CSF for 2 hours. Total RNA was then extracted and analyzed for HB-EGF and actin mRNA levels. The experiment depicted is representative of 2.

<!-- image -->

Fig 4. Effect of GM-CSF and LPS on the surface expression of HB-EGF molecule in PMN. PMN were cultured in the absence (A) or presence of 25 ng/mL GM-CSF (B) or 100 ng/mL LPS (C) for 21 hours. Only GM-CSF-treated PMN acquired membrane expression of the HB-EGF molecule (B). Membrane-bound HB-EGF expression was examined by indirect immunofluorescence analysis using the polyclonal H6 antibody (kindly provided by Dr S. Higashiyama), followed by a human-IgG preadsorbed biotinylated second antibody and by PE-conjugated streptavidin. Cells were also stained with irrelevant antibodies as controls. The expression patterns presented in this figure were reproduced in 5 independent experiments.

<!-- image -->

GM-CSF. Like IFNg or LPS, 33 GM-CSF is known to greatly potentiate the ability of PMN to release reactive oxygen influence the constitutive ability of PMN to produce O intermediates (ROI). To this end, PMN were incubated with 51 GM-CSF or LPS for 2 and 21 hours in the presence or absence of 10 2 8 mol/LDT, and then stimulated with 100 nmol/L fMLP, a bacteria-derived chemotactic peptide routinely used to stimu-ective toward LPS (Fig 7). Interestingly, DT did not affect late ROI release in PMN.Both GM-CSF and LPS-treatment 41 resulted in a dramatic upregulation of fMLP-stimulated, SOD- own), which is consistent with a lack of surface expression of inhibitable superoxide anion (O release from PMN, at both 2 2 ) 2- (not shown) and 21-hour incubation (Fig 7). While DT failed to 2 2 in response to fMLP at both 2- (not shown) and 21-hour incubation, it significantly suppressed (by approximately 60%) the priming effect of GM-CSF at 21 hours, but was largely ineff the priming effect of GM-CSF at 2-hour incubation (data not sh membrane HB-EGF at that time-point (see above).

DNA content (PI fluorescence)

<!-- image -->

Fig 5. Effect of DT on the development of apoptotic nuclei in PMN maintained in culture with GM-CSF. The presence of DT (kindly provided by Dr E. Papini) in the cultures inhibited specifically the protective effect of GM-CSF on PMN apoptosis. PMN suspensions, cultured for 44 hours alone or with 25 ng/mL GM-CSF in the presence or absence of 10 2 8 mol/L DT, were processed for DNA content analysis by propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry analysis. Data were plotted as red fluorescence intensity versus number of nuclei with a given DNA content as determined in each experimental condition. Numbers reported indicate the percentage of hypodiploid (apoptotic) nuclei. Similar results were observed in PMN isolated from 3 independent donors.

Release of membrane-bound HB-EGF into SN. Finally, we investigated whether GM-CSF-treated PMN, in addition to expressing the membrane-bound form, could also release HB-EGF protein into the SN. To this end, we developed a specific ELISA, according to the indications by Yamada et al. 43 The threshold sensitivity of this ELISA was 6.25 pg/mL and its validity was demonstrated by the fact that it was able to detect substantial amounts of soluble HB-EGF in U937 cellconditioned medium 2,14 (Fig 8A). No extracellular production 1 of soluble HB-EGF was detected in cell-free SN harvested from either resting or GM-CSF- and LPS-treated PMN, whereas significant levels of soluble antigenic HB-EGF were measured in SN harvested from autologous PBMC in resting conditions, which increased ( P , .05) after treatment with GM-CSF (Fig 8A). If SN from GM-CSF-treated PMN were previously concentrated up to 80-fold, then detectable yields of soluble HB-EGF could be specifically measured (Fig 8B).

Table 2. Effect of DT (10 2 8 mol/L) on the Apoptosis Rate of GM-CSF-Treated PMN

|        | 2 DT                |         | 1 DT              |
|--------|---------------------|---------|-------------------|
| medium | 34 6 9 (n 5 5)      | NS      | 35.7 6 15 (n 5 5) |
| GM-CSF | 21.5 6 10 (n 5 5)   | P , .05 | 33.5 6 15 (n 5 5) |
| IFN- g | 22.2 6 11.2 (n 5 3) | NS      | 15.7 6 13 (n 5 3) |

Data are expressed as percentage of fragmented nuclei reflecting the proportion of apoptotic cells after a 44-hour period of culture in the presence or absence of the listed factors. Means 6 SD for the number of experiments indicated in parentheses.

## medium

<!-- image -->

## GM-CSF

## GM-CSF + DT

<!-- image -->

Fig 6. Morphologic features of PMN cultured with GM-CSF in the presence or absence of DT. Only after GM-CSF treatment, PMN acquired sensitivity to DT, which induced typical apoptotic features. Cytospin preparations of PMN were stained using the May-Gru nwaldGiemsa method after incubation in vitro for 21 hours in the presence or absence of 0.5 ng/mL GM-CSF with or without 10 2 8 mol/L DT. The experiment depicted is representative of 2.

<!-- image -->

Fig 7. Effect of DT on the respiratory burst of PMN maintained in culture with GM-CSF. DT specifically suppressed the priming effect of GM-CSF, but was largely ineffective toward LPS (P F .05). PMN (3 3 10 5 /well) were cultured for 21 hours in the presence or absence of 0.5 ng/mL GM-CSF with or without 10 2 8 mol/L DT before stimulation with 100 nmol/L fMLP. Data represent the mean values ( 6 SD) of SOD-inhibitable O2 2 release from triplicate assays for each condition. Similar results were obtained in 3 separate experiments.

<!-- image -->

interest in studying PMN-derived cytokines and especially the role they play in cell proliferation and angiogenesis. 3

This study provides the first demonstration that human PMN, under particular stimulatory conditions, are capable of producing, bearing on their membrane, and releasing the important EGF superfamily cytokine, HB-EGF. Our findings, therefore, document a mechanism whereby PMN might directly influence tissue regeneration and even cancer progression.

Fig 8. Release of the soluble form of HB-EGF by PMN and PBMC. GM-CSF treatment induces release of the HB-EGF molecule into the culture medium (P F .05). (A) PMN and PBMC were cultured alone or in the presence of either 0.5 ng/mL GM-CSF or 100 ng/mL LPS. Cell-free SN were collected after 21 hours, and the levels of soluble HB-EGF protein were measured by a specific ELISA. The levels of soluble HB-EGF spontaneously released by the U937 cell line were also determined for comparison. (B) In selected experiments, PMNderived SN were concentrated approximately 80-fold before ELISA detection. Values represent means ( 6 SD) of duplicate determinations calculated from 3 independent experiments.

<!-- image -->

Lack of HER-1, HER-4, and CD9 expression in PMN: Ineffıcacy of HB-EGF. Because HB-EGF binds to HER-1 or HER-4, 13,14,25 and CD9 behaves as a coreceptor of membranebound HB-EGF, 31,32 we investigated whether these molecules were expressed by PMN. We failed to detect the expression of B-EGF mRNA upon treatment with GM-CSF, as shown by either HER-1 or CD9 molecules, or of HER-4 mRNA in PMN, as investigated by flow cytometry analysis and reverse transcrip- n). Classic agonists (listed in Table 1) for PMN all failed to tase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), respectively. In line with the lack of the related receptors, stimulatory experiments using HB-EGF did not induce any modifications in PMN. Interestingly, HER-4 mRNA was detectable in U937 cells in basal conditions (data not shown). Although negative in basal conditions, PMN expressed H both Northern blot analysis (Fig 1) and RT-PCR (data not show

## DISCUSSION

HB-EGF is a member of the EGF superfamily, which also includes epidermal growth factor, TGFmphiregulin, betacela , a lulin, epiregulin, neuregulin-1 and -2, and vaccinia growth factor. ,52 These are growth and differentiation factors, some of 12 which, especially HB-EGF, have been shown to actively participate in important tissue-modeling phenomena, involving autocrine or paracrine regenerative and neoplastic growth and highly complex activities such as angiogenesis and blastocyst implantation. 52 Although PMN have been found to infiltrate a 12, number of proliferative or degenerative lesions, their ability to release cytokines of the EGF family has rarely been considered. For instance, attention has only recently focused on PMNproduced TGF a . 9 In general, the role of PMN infiltrating tissue lesions is far from clear and there is currently a great deal of

<!-- image -->

induce HB-EGF, despite the presence in the culture medium ofpithelial neoplastic growth. arkably, a number of epitheIFN- , which usually acts as a PMN priming factor for gene lial neoplasias, for which HB-EGF is an autocrine growth factor g expression. The effects of GM-CSF on HB-EGF mRNA levels 3 were concentration-dependent, reached a plateau after 1 to 2 cular SMC, 7 hours of stimulation, and were independent of protein synthesis. -64 Because it has been shown that HB-EGF may be induced via the Ras pathway 12,53,54 and that GM-CSF actually activates the Ras and Raf -1 and the MAP-kinase signaling pathways by bindingprovide an unexpected source of a proliferative, angiogenetic to the beta subunit of its receptor, e 55,56 th Ras pathway may therefore be a likely candidate for the GM-CSF-mediatedancer. 1 induction of HB-EGF in PMN. By contrast, NFkB are unlikely neoplasia-infiltrating T lymphocytes that have been shown to to play a role in PMN HB-EGF upregulation. Although putative produce HB-EGF, when, as has been reported, exposed to a binding sites for NFkB have been identified in the HB-EGF nonsupporting promoter 2,23 and NFkB can be mobilized through the GM-CSF 1 receptor in many cell types,recent studies of ours have that 55,56 failed to demonstrate activation of NFkB in GM-CSF- cancers. -65 Anyway, the fact that PMN can synthesize, store, stimulated PMN. 7 5 The surface expression and structural integrity of membrane- ds further support to the suggestion that the role of PMN in e 21 Rem and, possibly, an angiogenetic factor through VEGF induced in vas 2 are capable of producing and releasing GMCSF 62 and are often infiltrated by PMN, especially when necrosis occurs.Thus, 65 although the relationship between infiltrating PMN and neoplastic cells is fairly elusive, PMN may factor such as HB-EGF, thus participating in the progression of c 2 Similar findings have been reported with regard to environment.In 21 PMN, however, we have documented a specific mechanism of activation for HB-EGF may match the specific biological properties of some 62 and release a substantial array of cytokines, including HB-EGF, len physiopathology needs to be redefined.

growth

- 7. Iida N, Grotendorst GR: Cloning and sequencing of a new gro transcript from activated human monocytes: Expression in leukocytes and wound tissue. Mol Cell Biol 10:5596, 1990

bound HB-EGF were detected by flow cytometry and by the demonstration that PMN acquired sensitivity to the apoptosispromoting effect of DT ,30 29 after GM-CSF treatment. DTinduced PMN cytolysis was associated with the development of hypodiploid nuclei and apoptotic cellular morphology. We did not, however, find complete killing of PMN after exposure to DT. DT receptor density or expression only in a subset of cells, lack of coreceptors such as CD9, fficiency of DT internaliza32 e tion, and, in general, the equilibrium status of apoptotic dge, UK, Cambridge University Press, 1994 pathways in terms of overexpression of anti-apoptotic factors, Cassatella MA: The production of cytokines by polymorphopossibly induced by GM-CSF itself, may influence PMN sensitivity to DT at any given time. The suppression of the . Cassatella MA: Cytokines Produced by Polymorphonuclear Neupriming effect of GM-CSF on fMLP-stimulated, SODinhibitable superoxide anion release was another effect of DT internalization. This effect coincided with the surface expression of membrane-bound HB-EGF, because it was not observed at 2 hours of incubation with GM-CSF. Whether the suppressive action on the respiratory burst is attributable to DT-mediated J: Intracellular pool of vascular endothelial growth factor in inhibition of protein synthesis, specifically to the synthe- human neutrophils. Blood 90:4153, 1997 22 and sis of the various NADPH oxidase components, is an intrigu33 ing possibility, whose further investigation may help to clarify ted the molecular basis of cytokine enhancement of the phagocyte ctor. Cytokine 10:254, 1998 respiratory burst capability. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors thank Dr E. Papini for kindly providing highly purified DT, Dr S. Higashiyama for his generous gift of anti-HB-EGF antibodies, and F. Calzetti for her excellent technical assistance. REFERENCES 1. Edwards S: Biochemistry and Physiology of the Neutrophil. Cambri 2. nuclear neutrophils. Immunol Today 16:21, 1995 3 trophils: Molecular and Biological Aspects. Austin, TX, RG Landes Co, 1996 4. Taichman NS, Young S, Cruchley AT, Taylor P, Paleolog E: Human neutrophils secrete vascular endothelial growth factor. J Leukoc Biol 62:397, 1997 5. Gaudry M, Bregerie O, Andrieu V, El Benna J, Pocidalo MA, Hakim 6. Webb NJ, Myers CR, Watson CJ, Bottomley MJ, Brenchley PE: Activa human neutrophils express vascular endothelial fa

- 8. Cassatella MA, Gasperini S, Calzetti F, Bertagnin A, Luster AD, McDonald PP: Regulated production of the interferon-gammainducible protein-10 (IP-10) chemokine by human neutrophils. Eur J Immu
- included in the repertoire of PMN-derived cytokines. It is not th factor-in a subpopulation of cytoplasmic granules. Blood 9. Calafat J, Janssen H, Stahle-Backdahl M, Zuurbier AE, Knol EF, A: Human monocytes and neutrophils store transforming grow a 90:125

Finally, we have also shown that GM-CSF-treated PMN may release the HB-EGF molecule into the culture medium. Because neither HER-1 nor HER-4 expression was detected and HBEGF did not induce any modifications in PMN, we are inclined to rule out the possibility that soluble HB-EGF might act in an nol 27:111, 1997 autocrine manner.

- 10. Grotendorst GR, Smale G, Pencev D: Production of transformgrowth factor b by human peripheral blood monocytes and ne
- were ions for TGF-driven synovial inflammation and hyperplasia. J Exp 11. Fava RA, Olsen NJ, Postlethwaite AE, Broadley KN, Davidson JM, Nanney LB, Lucas C, Townes AS: Transforming growth factor 1 b (TGF b 1) induced neutrophil recruitment to synovial tissues: Implicat b Med 173:1121, 1991
- 12. Raab G, Klagsbrun M: Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor. Biochim Biophys Acta 1333:F179, 1997

In conclusion, HB-EGF is a novel protein that can now be Egesten expressed in resting conditions, but is specifically inducible by 5, 1997 GM-CSF, a factor involved in modulating a number of PMN functions.The role, if any, played by HB-EGF expressed in ing 1,3 GM-CSF-stimulated PMN is less intuitive. Nevertheless, the utrophils. J Cell Physiol 140:396, 1989 fact that PMN produce HB-EGF is of interest, considering that a relationship has been detected between HB-EGF and pivotal biological activities which, 12,53 up until very recently, rarely or never associated with PMN. HB-EGF has been reported as playing a role in reproductive biology, nd 58,59 wou healing, atheromatous 60 phenomena, ,61 31 angiogenesis,and 27

- 13. Higashiyama S, Abraham JA, Miller J, Fiddes JC, Klagsbrun M:Schwartz A heparin-binding growth factor secreted by macrophage-like cells thatocyte migratory response to axonal injury: In vitro simulation. J Clin is related to EGF. Science 251:936, 1991 M: Involvement of wound-associated factors in rat brain astr Invest 97:162, 1996
- 14. Higashiyama S, Lau K, Besner GE, Abraham JA, Klagsbrun M: Structure of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor. Multiple forms, ing of a diphtheria toxin receptor: Identity with a heparin-binding primary structure, and glycosylation of the mature protein. J Biol Chemlike growth factor precursor. Cell 69:1051, 1992 267:6205, 1992 29. Naglich JG, Metherall JE, Russell DW, Eidels L: Expression clon EGF-
- 15. Blotnick S, Peoples GE, Freeman MR, Eberlein TJ, KlagsbrunInternucleosomal M: T lymphocytes synthesize and export heparin-binding epidermal ytolysis. growth factor-like growth factor and basic fibroblast growth factor, slation inhibition. J Biol Chem 264:15261, 1989 release by CD4 1 and CD8 1 T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:2890, 1994
- 30. Chang MP, Bramhall J, Graves S, Bonavida B, Wisnieski BJ: DNA cleavage precedes diphtheria toxin-induced c Evidence that cell lysis is not a simple consequence tran
- mitogens for vascular cells and fibroblasts: Differential production andOuchi N, Kihara S, Yamashita S, Higashiyama S, Nakagawa T, mRNA localize iochem J 328:923, 1997 31. Shimomura I, Funahashi T, Kameda-Takemura K, Kawata S, Taniguchi N, Matsuzawa Y: Role of membrane-anchored heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor and CD9 on macrophages. B
- G: acts as the diphtheria toxin receptor, forms a complex with membrane Bloodhtheria toxin sensitivity. EMBO J 13:2322, 1994 Iwamoto R, Higashiyama S, Mitamura T, Taniguchi N, Klagsbrun M, Mekada E: Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor, which prote DRAP27/CD9, which up-regulates functional receptors and dip
- 16. Powell PP, Klagsbrun M, Abraham JA, Jones RC: Eosinophils expressing heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor around lung microvessels in pulmonary hypertension. Am J Pathol 32. 143:784, 1993
- 17. Vinante F, Rigo A, Papini E, Cassatella MA, Pizzolo Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor/diphtheriain toxin receptor expression by acute myeloid leukemia cells. 93:1715, 1999
- 18. Dluz S, Higashiyama S, Damm D, Abraham JA, Klagsbrun M: mRNA levels and secretion of active mitogen. J Biol Chem 268:18330, 1993
- Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor expression ocyte respiratory burst capability. Studies on the gene expression in cultured fetal human vascular smooth muscle cells. Induction ofeveral NADPH oxidase components. J Biol Chem 265:20241, 1990 33. Cassatella MA, Bazzoni F, Flynn RM, Dusi S, Trinchieri G, Rossi F: Molecular basis of interferon- LPS enhancement of g and phag of s
- 34. Koenderman L, Kok PT, Hamenlink ML, Verhoeven AJ, Bruijnzeel PL: An improved method for the isolation of eosinophilic granulocytes from peripheral blood of normal individuals. J Leukoc Bi
- 35 McDonald PP, Cassatella MA, Bald A, Maggi E, Romagnani S, Gruss HJ, Pizzolo G: CD30 ligation induces nuclear factor-kappa B activation in human T cell lines. Eur J Immunol 25:2870, 1995

cells.

- 19. Yoshizumi M, Kourembanas S, Temizer DH, Cambria RP, Quertermous T, Lee ME: Tumor necrosis factor increases transcription ol 44:79, 1998 of the heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor gene . in vascular endothelial cells. J Biol Chem 267:9467, 1992
- is Chilosi an 36. Vinante F, Rigo A, Vincenzi C, Ricetti MM, Marrocchella R, M, Cassatella MA, Bonazzi L, Pizzolo G: IL-8 mRNA ex and IL-8 production by acute myeloid leukemia Leukemia 7:1552, 1993
- 20. Hashimoto K, Higashiyama S, Asada H, Hashimura E, Kobayashi T, Sudo K, Nakagawa T, Damm D, Yoshikawa K, Taniguchi N: Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor autocrine growth factor for human keratinocytes. J Biol Chem 269:pression 20060, 1994
- 21. Peoples GE, Blotnick S, Takahashi K, Freeman MR, Klagsbrun M, Eberlein TJ: T lymphocytes that infiltrate tumors and atheroscleroticrampera M, Zanolin E, Locatelli F, Gallati H, Chilosi M, Pizzolo plaques produce heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth Serum levels of p55 and p75 soluble TNF receptors in adult acute factor and basic fibroblast growth factor: A potential pathologic role. emia at diagnosis: Correlation with clinical and biological features Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:6547, 1995 37. Vinante F, Rigo A, Tecchio C, Morosato L, Nadali G, Ricetti MM, K G: leuka and outcome. Br J Haematol 102:1025, 1998
- 22. Dethlefsen SM, Raab G, Moses MA, Adam RM, Klagsbrun M, Freeman MR: Extracellular calcium influx stimulates metalloproteinaseliozzi C, Rossi B: Human monocytes express amphiregulin and cleavage and secretion of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factoregulin growth factors upon activation. Eur Cytokine Netw 8:73, independently of protein kinase C. J Cell Biochem 69:143, 1998 38. Mograbi B, Rochet N, Imbert V, Bourget I, Bocciardi R, Emi her 1997
- somal assignment of the gene encoding the human heparin-binding propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry. J Immunol Methods 39. Nicoletti I, Migliorati G, Pagliacci MC, Grignani F, Riccardi CA: A rapid and simple method for measuring thymocyte apoptosis by 139:27
- 40. Wyllie AH, Kerr JF, Currie AR: Cell death: The significance of
- 23. Fen Z, Dhadly MS, Yoshizumi M, Hilkert RJ, Quertermous T, Eddy RL, Shows TB, Lee ME: Structural organization and chromoepidermal growth factor-like growth factor/diphtheria toxin receptor. 1, 1991 Biochemistry 32:7932, 1993
- 24. Loukianov E, Loukianova T, Wiedlocha A, Olsnes S: Expressionapoptosis. Int Rev Cytol 68:251, 1980 of mRNA for a short form of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor. 41. Gene 195:81, 1997
- 25. Elenius K, Paul S, Allison G, Sun J, Klagsbrun M: Activation of eukocytes. The chemoattractant Formyl-methionyl-Leucyl-PhenylalaHER-4 by heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor stimulates chemo-ine induces the gene expression and release of interleukin 8 through a taxis but not proliferation. EMBO J 16:1268, 1997 Cassatella MA, Bazzoni F, Ceska M, Ferro I, Baggiolini M, Berton G: Interleukin 8 production by human polymorphonuclear l n pertussis toxin sensitive pathway. J Immunol 148:3216, 1992
- 26. Higashiyama S, Abraham JA, Klagsbrun M: Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor stimulation of smooth muscle cell migration: superoxide anion production by granulocytes in whole blood. A Dependence on interactions with cell surface heparan sulfate. J Cell ical test for evaluation of phagocyte function and serum opsonic Biol 122:933, 1993 42. Bellavite P, Dri P, Della Bianca V, Serra MC: The measurement of clin capacity. Eur J Clin Invest 13:363, 1983
- 27. Abramovitch R, Neeman M, Reich R, Stein I, Keshet E, Abraham JA, Solomon A, Marikovsky M: Intercellular communication between vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells mediated by eparin-binding EGF-like growth factor levels in patients after partial heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor and vascu-tectomy lar endothelial growth factor. FEBS Lett 425:441, 1998 43. Yamada A, Kawata S, Tamura S, Kiso S, Higashiyama S, Umeshita K, Sakon M, Taniguchi N, Monden M, Matsuzawa Y: Plasma h hepa as determined with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 246:783, 1998
- 28. Faber-Elman A, Solomon A, Abraham JA, Marikovsky M,
- 44. Cassatella MA, Meda L, Gasperini S, Calzetti F, Bonora S:

of

- Interleukin 10 (IL-10) upregulates IL-1 receptor antagonist production McDonald PP, Bald A, Cassatella MA: Activation of the NF-kB from lipopolysaccharide-stimulated human polymorphonuclear leuko- thway by inflammatory stimuli in human neutrophils. Blood 89:3421, cytes by delaying mRNA degradation. J Exp Med 179:1695, 1994 57. pa 1997
- 45. McColl SR, Paquin R, Menard C, Beaulieu AD: Human neutrophils produce high levels of the interleukin 1 receptor antagonist in tion response to granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor tumor necrosis factor- J Exp Med 176:593, 1992 a .
- 46. Nakano T, Raines EW, Abraham JA, Klagsbrun M, Ross R: Lysophosphatidylcholine upregulates the level of heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor mRNA in human monocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:1069, 1994
- and tor gene expression during sensitization and decidualization in the 58. Zhang Z, Funk C, Glasser SR, Mulholland J: Progesterone regula of heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth fac rat uterus: Effects of the antiprogestin, ZK 98.299. Endocrinology 135:1256, 1994
- Biol lastocyst EGF-receptor in implantation. Development 120:1071, 1994 59. Das SK, Wang XN, Paria BC, Damm D, Abraham JA, Klagsbrun M, Andrews GK, Dey SK: Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor gene is induced in the mouse uterus temporally by the blastocyst solely at the site of its apposition: A possible ligand for interaction with b
- 48. Wang P, Wu P, Anthes JC, Siegel MI, Egan RW, Billah MM: Interleukin-10 inhibits interleukin-8 production in human neutrophils. ke growth factor in wound fluid as a response to injury. Proc Natl Blood 83:2678, 1994 60. Marikovsky M, Breuing K, Liu PY, Eriksson E, Higashiyama S, Farber P, Abraham JA, Klagsbrun M: Appearance of heparin-binding EGF-li Acad Sci USA 90:3889, 1993
- 47. Bazzoni F, Cassatella MA, Laudanna C, Rossi F: Phagocytosis of opsonized yeast induces TNF mRNA a accumulation and protein release by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. J Leukoc 50:223, 1991
- 49. Liles WC, Klebanoff SJ: Regulation of apoptosis in neutrophils- 61. Fast track to death? J Immunol 155:3289, 1995 50. Cassatella MA, Berton G: Modulation of neutrophil functions byniguchi N: Localization of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor in IFN g , in Baron S (ed): Interferon Principles and Application. Galves- smooth muscle cells and macrophages of human atherosclerotic ton, TX, University of Texas Medical Branch, 1992, p 387 Miyagawa J, Higashiyama S, Kawata S, Inui Y, Tamura S, Yamamoto K, Nishida M, Nakamura T, Yamashita S, Matsuzawa Y, Ta the plaques. J Clin Invest 95:404, 1995
- 51. Mege JL, Gomez-Cambronero J, Molski TF, Becker EL, Sha'afi RI: Effect of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor Mizushima on superoxide production in cytoplasts and intact human neutrophils: Role ors produced by a cell line from thyroid carcinoma. Cancer Res of protein kinase and G-proteins. J Leukoc Biol 46:161, 1989 62. Yoshida M, Matsuzaki H, Sakata K, Takeya M, Kato K, S, Kawakita M, Takatsuki K: Neutrophil chemotactic fact 52:464, 1992
- 52. Davis-Fleischer KM, Besner GE: Structure and function heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF). Front Biosci 3:288, 1998
- 53. McCarthy SA, Samuels ML, Pritchard CA, Abraham JA, McMahon M: Rapid induction of heparin-binding epidermal growth factor/ diphtheria toxin receptor expression by Raf and Ras oncogenes. Genes Dev 9:1953, 1995
- of 63. Pak AS, Wright MA, Matthews JP, Collins SL, Petruzzelli GJ, Young MRI: Mechanisms of immune suppression in patients with head and neck cancer: Presence of CD34( ) cells which suppress immune 1 functions within cancers that secrete granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor. Clin Cancer Res 1:95, 1995
- 54. Kerkhoff E, Rapp UR: Induction of cell proliferation in quiescent inger D, Muschal B, Veelken H, Kulmburg P, Ikle DN, Lindemann NIH 3T3 cells by oncogenic c-Raf-1. Mol Cell Biol 17:2576, 1997 64. Lahn M, Fisch P, Kohler G, Kunzmann R, Hentrich I, Jesuiter H, Behr A: Pro-inflammatory and T cell inhibitory cytokines are secreted at high levels in tumor cell cultures of human renal cell carcinoma. Eur Urol 35:
- 55. Kwon EM, Sakamoto KM: The molecular mechanism of action of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. J Invest Med 70, 1999 44:442, 1996
- 56. Armitage JO: Emerging applications of recombinant granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Blood 1998
- humanImmunohistochemical characterization of cellular infiltrates in epider92:4491,tumors induced by two-stage and complete chemical carcinogen65. Moon DC, Nakayama J, Urabe A, Terao H, Kinoshita N, Hori Y: mal esis in mouse skin. Dermatology 19:146, 1992