## Adjunctive therapies

Treatments that are used together with a primary treatment to increase its potency. For example, an immunomodulatory treatment can be adjunctive to primary treatment with an antibiotic.

1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Centre for Microbial Diseases and Immunity Research, Room 232, 2259 Lower Mall Research Station, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, V6T 1Z4 British Columbia, Canada. 2 Complex Traits Group, Department of Physiology, 368 Bellini Building, 3649 Promenade Sir William Osler, McGill University, H3G 0B1 Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 3 Department of Immunology, Medical Sciences Building, University of T oronto, T oronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada. e-mails: bob@hancocklab. com; anastasiya.nyzhnyk@ mcgill.ca; dana.philpott@ utoronto.ca

doi:10.1038/nrmicro2745

## REVIEWS

## Modulating immunity as a therapy for bacterial infections

Robert E. W. Hancock 1 , Anastasia Nijnik 2  and Dana J. Philpott 3

Abstract | Despite our efforts to halt the increase and spread of antimicrobial resistance, bacteria continue to become less susceptible to antimicrobial drugs over time, and rates of discovery for new antibiotics are declining. Thus, it is essential to explore new paradigms for anti-infective therapy. One promising approach involves host-directed immunomodulatory therapies, whereby natural mechanisms in the host are exploited to enhance therapeutic benefit. The objective is to initiate or enhance protective antimicrobial immunity while limiting inflammation-induced tissue injury. A range of potential immune modulators have been proposed, including innate defence regulator peptides and agonists of innate immune components such as Toll-like receptors and NOD-like receptors.

From the moment of birth and throughout our lifetime, we continuously interact with a multitude of microbial species. These include the commensal bacteria that colonize the mucosal surfaces of our bodies and the pathogenic organisms that, in most cases, are effectively targeted by our immune defences and prevented from causing an infection. Thus, the evolution of immunity and of many other aspects of our physiology has been driven by continuous interactions with commensals and the other microbial species in our environment. The dysregulation of such interactions can result in life-threatening infectious and inflammatory disorders.

Immune defence mechanisms can be broadly divided into the innate and adaptive arms, although this division is to a large extent arbitrary, as the two branches are highly interdependent and use similar effector mechanisms, and in most cases an effective immune response requires the coordinated activity of both arms (BOX 1) . Pathogenic organisms actively suppress the normal mechanisms of the immune response by expressing specific virulence factors, and this contributes to a large extent to their pathogenicity and disease progression. At the same time, it is becoming increasingly recognized that the altered or inappropriate activity of the immune system also contributes to the pathology of such conditions. For example, the hyperactivation of immune responses contributes to lethality in individuals with sepsis and those infected with an influenza virus . 1

The ability to modulate immune responses, by either suppression or enhancement depending on the need, has proved to be a useful therapeutic strategy in many contexts, including the prevention and treatment of

infections, the suppression of autoimmune and inflammatory responses, and the stimulation of antitumour immunity in patients with cancer 2,3 . When the currently available immunomodulatory treatments are used as anti-infectives, they typically work by correcting an acquired or congenital defect in immune system function and often use recombinant forms of the natural immunomodulators produced by the host immune system. They are largely designed as adjunctive therapies to support and extend the effectiveness of anti  biotics and antivirals. For example, type I interferons (IFNs) have been used clinically to stimulate immune responses in patients with viral infections . Vaccination can also be 4 considered as a form of immunomodulatory therapy and is one of the most successful and cost-effective forms of medical intervention for the prevention of infectious diseases. It relies on the induction of immune responses to specific antigen combinations, typically delivered in formulation with an appropriate adjuvant that activates innate immunity and enhances adaptive immune responses (BOX 2) . Monoclonal antibodies are another type of immunomodulator and have been in clinical use for several decades, with more than 20 antibody-based therapies approved in the United States alone to date and &gt;150 others currently in clinical trials . However, 5 their application against infectious diseases is not common and focuses mainly on inhibiting deleterious inflammatory responses.

Immunomodulation offers certain advantages. By targeting the host rather than the pathogen, immunomodulation largely avoids selective pressure for the evolution of microbial resistance. Indeed, the stimulation of

## REVIEWS

## Box 1 | Overview of the immune system

Innate immunity is the first line of defence against pathogenic organisms and the interface of the interactions between the host and the microbiota 107 . At the cellular level, the innate immune response is mediated by epithelial cells in mucosal surfaces and phagocytic cells that reside in the tissues or are recruited from the blood, including neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages. At the molecular level, innate immune cells sense microorganisms through pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which recognize molecular signatures (also known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns) from microbial cells 107,108 , including proteins, lipids and nucleic acids. PRRs also recognize host signature molecules that are indicative of disease and cellular damage. Pathogen recognition through these receptors results in the activation of cellular defence mechanisms and the production of secreted pro-inflammatory cytokines, which alert other host cells to the presence of infection, drive further recruitment of immune cells from the blood to the site of infection, and induce systemic responses to the disease, such as fever. Pathogen recognition through PRRs also stimulates the microbicidal mechanisms of innate immunity, such as the production of reactive oxygen species and antimicrobial peptides, in part through the activation of phagocytic cells.

The defence mechanisms of adaptive immunity are based on the recognition of 'foreign' molecular shapes termed antigens. Adaptive immunity is activated more slowly (on the time scale of 3 days to a couple of weeks) by a combination of signals from the innate immune system and by antigens, and is largely mediated by B cells and T cells. These cells carry receptors that recognize foreign molecular patterns but have no intrinsic bias towards pathogen recognition. Adaptive immunity is therefore dependent on the innate immune system for initial pathogen recognition. Signals from the innate immune response drive the selective expansion and activation of the B cell and T cell populations with specificity for the ongoing infectious challenge. The main effector mechanisms of adaptive immunity include the production of antibodies by B cells (to act as blocking antibodies, and/or as opsonins for complement- and phagocyte-mediated killing), the killing of infected host cells by cytotoxic T cells, and various helper T cell-mediated actions. Crucially, activation of adaptive immunity results in the production of memory B cells and T cells, which can provide life-long specific protection against subsequent infections with a pathogen bearing the same antigens.

adaptive immunity through vaccination has remained resilient to microbial resistance over decades of clinical use 6 . Furthermore, the nonspecific nature of innate immune defences suggests that their modulation affords broad-spectrum protection against a range of microbial pathogens, enabling prophylactic use in high-risk groups and early treatment before the identification of causative infectious agents, for example.

However, inappropriate activation of innate immunity can result in harmful pro-inflammatory responses

and tissue damage, as observed in inflammatory diseases, sepsis and some viral respiratory infections . Therefore, 7 successful application of immunomodulatory therapies requires controlled stimulation of protective immunity without an increase in systemic pro-inflammatory responses. Our continually expanding understanding of the complex mechanisms of innate immunity will aid in the development of such therapies.

This Review critically appraises the potential for the stimulation of protective antibacterial immunity by a range of innate immune modulators, including agonists of the major classes of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), immunomodulatory host defence peptides (HDPs; also called antimicrobial peptides) and other natural bacterial ligands. The use of analogous molecules, including antimicrobial peptides, as direct microbicidal agents has been covered in depth elsewhere 8,9 and is not discussed here.

## Targeting innate immune receptors

One immunomodulatory approach currently being investigated is the targeting of innate immune PRRs, including Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and NOD-like receptors (NLRs). Agonists of the intracellular nucleic acid sensors RIG-I (also known as DDX58) and AIM2 also have potential as therapeutic adjuvants, but they have not been formally tested (and are therefore not discussed below).

Targeting Toll-like receptors to prevent and treat infections. The TLR family of PRRs in humans includes ten transmembrane proteins 10 . Individual members of the TLR family are specialized for the recognition of different classes of ligand and are located either on the cell surface or in the endosomal compartment. The cell surface TLRs typically sense signature components of microbial cell envelopes or flagella; for example, TLR4 and accessory proteins recognize lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 11,12 , TLR2 in complex with either TLR1 or TLR6 recognizes lipoteichoic acid and various lipopeptides, and TLR5 recognizes flagellin. Endosomal TLRs primarily sense microbial nucleic acids; for example, TLR3 recognizes double-stranded RNA, TLR7 and TLR8 bind single-stranded RNA, and TLR9 recognizes microbial DNA with unmethylated CpG

## Box 2 | Adjuvants

Adjuvants are agents that help to enhance and appropriately orient immune responses 109 . In this Review we use this term for both therapeutic adjuvants and vaccine adjuvants. Therapeutic adjuvants, also termed immunomodulators, usually enhance innate immune mechanisms that lead to the resolution of infections, and may be used alone or more often as an adjunctive therapy together with antibiotics. For example, Toll-like receptor (TLR) and NOD-like receptor (NLR) agonists stimulate innate immunity through the same basic mechanisms (that is, the same receptors, pathways and effector mechanisms) as microorganisms. One of the main challenges in the application of therapeutic adjuvants is to avoid the exacerbation of potentially harmful inflammation, which is usually triggered together with protective immunity. The fact that innate defence regulator (IDR) peptides offer protection against bacterial infections while suppressing excessive inflammation (in animal models) indicates that it is possible to separate protective innate immune mechanisms from inflammation, and encourages the belief that safe and effective immunomodulators can be developed.

By contrast, vaccine adjuvants are administered together with a vaccine and work to enhance and appropriately skew antigen-specific adaptive immune responses. There seem to be three basic mechanisms associated with different vaccine adjuvants 110 : recruitment of innate immune cells (such as antigen-presenting dendritic cells), appropriate presentation of the antigen to such cells (the 'depot effect') and activation of such cells. These mechanisms are broadly based on the stimulation of innate immunity, which in turn activates the adaptive immune response to clear the pathogen.

## Pattern recognition receptors

(PRRs). Host receptors, such as T oll-like receptors (TLRs) or NOD-like receptors (NLRs), that can sense pathogen signatures (pathogen-associated molecular patterns) and endogenous damage-associated molecular patterns and then initiate signalling cascades that lead to an innate immune response. These proteins can be membrane-bound receptors (such as TLRs) or cytoplasmic receptors (such as NLRs).

Nature Reviews   Microbiology | Figure 1 | Pattern recognition receptors of the innate immune system and their signalling pathways. a | T oll-like receptors (TLRs), which function as dimers (shown for TLR4 only), sense microbial molecular patterns (such as lipopolysaccharide and double-stranded RNA) on the cell surface and in the endosomal compartment and activate signalling pathways through TIR domain-containing adaptor proteins (myeloid differentiation 88 (MYD88), TIR domain-containing adaptor protein (TIRAP), TIR domain adaptor molecule (TRAM) and TIR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFN β (TRIF)) and other downstream signalling mediators. Note that TLR4-TRIF signalling is initiated in endosomes after internalization of the receptor (not shown). TLR signalling ultimately leads to the activation of nuclear factorκ B (NFκ B) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling (pathways not shown in detail), as well as IFN-regulatory factors (IRFs), resulting in the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and type I interferons (IFNs) and, consequently, the activation of cellular antimicrobial functions (for example, phagocytosis, oxidative burst and production of antimicrobial peptides). b | NOD (nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing) receptors sense components of peptidoglycan in the cytosol and activate receptor-interacting protein 2 (RIP2) and downstream signalling pathways, including the MAPK and NFκ B signalling pathways. This leads to the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, and the activation of antimicrobial functions. NOD-like receptors (NLRs) are activated by diverse microbial signature molecules and other danger signals in the cytosol. After activation, they recruit the adaptor protein ASC (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD), leading to inflammasome assembly, caspase 1 activation, and the processing and secretion of the cytokines interleukin-1 β (IL-1 β ) and IL-18. CARD9, caspase recruitment domain-containing 9; IRAK, IL-1 receptor-associated kinase; TAK1, TGFβ -activated kinase 1; TRAF , TNF receptor-associated factor.

<!-- image -->

motifs. In addition to these microbial ligands, TLRs recognize endogenous ligands, often referred to as damageassociated molecular patterns (DAMPs) or alarmins, including high-mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1), S100A8-S100A9, heat shock proteins, uric acid, heparin, DNA and purine metabolites 10 . These 'molecular patterns' are, however, perhaps misnamed, as they represent very different molecules from microbial signatures and probably act through different mechanisms or binding sites. The interaction of microbial signature molecules with TLRs triggers the activation of signal transduction pathways, such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) pathways, resulting in the activation of innate immune cells. This, in turn, drives the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and promotes the induction of antimicrobial effector functions (FIG. 1a) . The importance of TLR signalling in anti  microbial defence is illustrated by the fact that polymorphisms in the TLR signalling network have been associated with impaired control of bacterial infections in humans 13 .

There are two possible methods of modulating TLRdriven responses, and both cases use molecules that often mimic natural ligands. Agonists have an adjuvant effect on innate immune pathways, promoting protective responses but potentially enhancing inflammation. By contrast, antagonists can suppress immune pathways and potentially harmful inflammation that is either linked to infection or the result of altered immune interactions with the bacterial microbiota (termed dysbiosis). However, antagonists might also repress protective mechanisms.

TLRs are already targeted by several approved immuno  modulatory therapies and are being investigated as drug targets for many diseases through ongoing clinical trials and research programmes ( TABLE 1 ; for a recent review on the use of TLR agonists and antagonists, see REF. 14 ). For example, CADI-05, which acts as an agonist for many TLRs (and probably for other PRRs) and consists of heat-killed Mycobacterium indicus pranii , is used as an adjunctive therapy in combination with

## REVIEWS

Table 1 | Immunomodulatory therapies that target pattern recognition receptors to treat microbial infections

| Drug                                                          | Target and  activity      | Application                                                                                                 | Phase of  development   | Companies                                                                 |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Imiquimod 121                                                 | TLR7 agonist              | Keratosis, basal cell carcinoma,  HPV-associated genital warts                                              | Clinical                | Graceway Pharmaceuticals,  iNova Pharmaceuticals,  Mochida Pharmaceutical |
| MPL 122,123                                                   | TLR4 agonist              | Adjuvant in the Cervarix  (GlaxoSmithKline) vaccine against  HPV infections and associated  cervical cancer | Clinical                | GlaxoSmithKline                                                           |
| Luivac (lysate of a combination of  bacterial species) 18,19  | Agonist for  various TLRs | Recurring respiratory tract infections                                                                      | Clinical                | Daiichi Sankyo                                                            |
| CADI-05 (heat-killed  Mycobacterium  indicus pranii ) 15      | Agonist for  various TLRs | Leprosy (in combination with  antimicrobial drugs) and tuberculosis                                         | Clinical and  Phase III | Cadila Pharmaceuticals                                                    |
| CpG-7909  (REF.16)                                            | TLR9 agonist              | Improving the efficacy of the  anthrax vaccine BioThrax (Coley  Pharmaceutical)                             | Phase II                | Coley Pharmaceutical                                                      |
| DIMS-0150 (an oligonucleotide-based  drug) 17                 | TLR9 agonist              | Steroid-resistant ulcerative colitis                                                                        | Phase III               | InDex Pharmaceuticals                                                     |
| E-5564 (eritoran)                                             | TLR4 antagonist           | Sepsis                                                                                                      | Phase III               | Eisai Pharmaceuticals                                                     |
| TAK-242 (resatorvid)                                          | TLR4 antagonist           | Sepsis                                                                                                      | Suspended in  Phase III | Takeda Pharmaceutical                                                     |
| MF-59 (squalene and water emulsion)  and MTP-PE (mifamurtide) | NOD2 agonist              | HIV, influenza viruses                                                                                      | Phase I                 | Chiron/Novartis                                                           |

HPV, human papillomavirus; MPL, monophosphoryl lipid A; MTP-PE, phosphatidylethanolamine-linked muramyl tripeptide; NOD2, nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing 2; TLR, Toll-like receptor.

antimicrobial drugs for the treatment of leprosy 15 and is in Phase III clinical trials as a potential therapy for tuberculosis. The synthetic TLR9 agonist CpG-7909 successfully completed Phase II clinical trials for improving the efficacy of the anthrax vaccine BioThrax (Coley Pharmaceutical) 16 , and the DNA-based immunomodulator DIMS-0150 (from InDex Pharmaceuticals), which also targets TLR9, is entering Phase III trials for the treatment of steroid-resistant ulcerative colitis 17 . Crude bacterial lysate preparations have also shown some efficacy against bacterial infections 18 ; for example, Luivac (Daiichi Sankyo) reduces the incidence of recurring respiratory tract infections in children 19 and probably acts in part through TLR stimulation.

These clinical successes and ongoing trials are based on a large body of evidence from animal models showing that TLR agonists can act as potent and safe vaccine adjuvants, can induce the clearance of existing bacterial infections and can promote protection against future infections or colonization by pathogenic organisms 20 . This nonspecific stimulation of innate immunity as a mechanism of broad-spectrum protection against bacterial infections is particularly interesting and has been described as stimulated innate resistance. It is illustrated by recent studies in mouse models showing that LPS (a TLR4 agonist) administered at the time of infection with Bordetella pertussis offers partial protection against the infectious challenge 21 and that treatment with flagellin (a TLR5 agonist) is similarly protective against Streptococcus pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections when administered either concurrently with or following bacterial challenge 22,23 . Flagellin also reduces gut colonization

with vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium in animals treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics 24 . Crude microbial preparations have been found to have similar protective effects, possibly through stimulation of multiple PRRs, including TLRs. For example, protective activity against a range of bacterial pathogens is seen in mice pretreated with whole-cell lysates of Haemophilus influenzae 21,25 or a membrane protein fraction from an attenuated strain of Francisella tularensis formulated with cationic liposomes and DNA 26 . Pre-stimulation with crude H. influenzae lysates or with specific TLR2 and TLR4 ligands is also protective against fungal and viral pathogens, highlighting the broad protective activity of the response 21,27,28 . The use of probiotic bacteria, which may act as TLR agonists because they contain signature molecules that are recognized by TLRs, is another effective immunomodulatory strategy to prevent infections (BOX 3) .

However, owing to the intrinsic complexity of hostpathogen interactions, the outcomes of innate immune stimulation may be difficult to predict. For example, disease pathology is actually exacerbated in mice that are chronically infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis and then treated with a synthetic version of the TLR3 ligand polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (polyI:C) 29 , indicating that modulation of innate immune responses should be undertaken with caution and should use appropriate systems level analyses.

As TLR stimulation is a strong inducer of inflammation, it has been widely implicated in the pathologies of inflammatory disorders and infectious diseases associated with inappropriate hyperactivation of immune responses. Thus, there is an ongoing effort to develop

## Box 3 | Probiotics and therapies targeting the microbiota

The role of the microbiota in shaping our immune system, as well as other aspects of our physiology, is becoming increasingly recognized 111 , emphasizing the potential effects of medical interventions, such as antibiotics, on our homeostatic interactions with the microbiota. Antibiotic regimens can severely affect the composition of mucosal microbial communities, leading to increased risks of Clostridium difficile -associated diarrhoea and vaginal Candida albicans infections, and the exacerbation of asthma and allergic diseases 112 . Although changes in immune function as the result of immunomodulatory therapies may similarly disrupt the homeostasis of mucosal microbiota, it is also likely that appropriately tailored immunomodulators can be designed to maintain, enhance and restore mucosal homeostasis.

Probiotics typically consist of microorganisms that naturally colonize our mucosal surfaces, including Lactobacillus spp. and Bifidobacterium spp., Streptococcus salivarius and Escherichia coli str. Nissle 1917. The ease of production and administration for probiotics, and their lack of toxic side effects even in long-term treatment, make them an attractive therapeutic option. Probiotics act through several complementary mechanisms to elicit their therapeutic effects. These include modulation of local and systemic immune responses by interacting with mucosal epithelial cells and resident innate and adaptive immune system cells, and protection against colonization through direct competition with, or possibly bacteriocin -mediated action against, bacterial pathogens 111,113 . These complex mechanisms of action probably resemble the natural host interactions with the microbiota and may include induction and/or suppression of cytokines, chemokines and antimicrobial peptides 114,115 , recruitment or activation of cell populations in the gut mucosa, stimulation of mucosal immunoglobulin A responses, and enhancement of epithelial repair and barrier functions 36,111,113 . Importantly, such activities are likely to include both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects, thus resulting in enhanced immune defences and promoting the maintenance of mucosal homeostasis. This combination of pro- and anti-inflammatory activity is illustrated by the fact that chemokine production and nuclear factorκ B signalling are inhibited by S. salivarius str. K12 (REF. 116) , but Toll-like receptor signalling and the secretion of innate immune mediators are activated in response to E. coli str. Nissle 1917 in epithelial cells 117 .

The administration of probiotics has shown promise in a range of clinical trials in patients with infectious and inflammatory diseases 17,118,119 . However, optimal treatment protocols and the identification of the patient groups that would benefit the most need to be established before probiotics can gain wider clinical use. There is also ongoing research into the applications of transgenic lactic acid bacteria as vehicles for the delivery of immunomodulatory compounds to mucosal surfaces (reviewed in REF. 120 ). This approach has produced highly promising results in animal models as a means for the delivery of vaccine antigens, as well as antibodies, cytokines and other immunomodulators for the treatment of inflammatory, allergic and infectious diseases 120 .

## Bacteriocin

A small ribosomally synthesized, heat-stable peptide that is produced by one bacterium and is active against another bacterium, either of the same species (narrow spectrum) or across species and even genera (broad spectrum).

## Inflammasome

A molecular complex of several proteins that, following its assembly, cleaves pro-interleukin-1 β (pro-IL-1 β ) and pro-IL-18, thereby producing active IL-1 β and IL-18.

TLR antagonists for the treatment of such conditions 14 . In particular, sepsis is a highly lethal complication associated with severe infection and tissue damage (triggered by uncontrolled systemic production of proinflammatory mediators) followed by endotoxin tolerance and multiple organ failure. However, blockade of TLR4 (or pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β)) with monoclonal antibody therapies has failed to improve disease outcomes in patients with sepsis 30 . The reasons for failure are likely to be complex and include patient heterogeneity, the timing of treatment (as patients with late-stage sepsis actually suffer from suppressed inflammation), the multiple PRRs that are probably involved in sepsis, and the importance of maintaining effective immune defences against infections. Furthermore, recent clinical trials testing TLR antagonists for the treatment of sepsis have had disappointing results: the TLR4 signalling inhibitor TAK-242 (also known as resatorvid; from Takeda Pharmaceutical) 31 , which was in a Phase III trial, was discontinued, and in a Phase II trial the TLR4 antagonist E-5564 (also known as eritoran; from Eisai

Pharmaceuticals) had no effect in reducing mortality in patients with severe sepsis, despite previously encouraging results in animal models and endotoxin challenges in healthy volunteers 32,33 .

In spite of these discouraging results, some TLR antagonist antibodies and blocking peptides are in preclinical development for treating acute and chronic inflammatory disorders, including diseases involving dysbiosis, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 14,34 . Further development of such therapies will need to take into account not only the deleterious role of immune responses in the pathology of such conditions, but also the crucial role of these responses in defence of the affected mucosal surfaces 35,36 .  For example, loss of immune function in the gut mucosa can result in defects in tissue repair and can cause intestinal inflammation 37,38 , whereas activation of TLRs through agonists might exacerbate pro-inflammatory responses.

Modulating NOD-like receptor signalling. NLRs are a family of cytoplasmic innate immune receptors that detect both microbial and endogenous danger signals to induce inflammation and direct antimicrobial activities 39 . Within this family, NOD1 (nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing 1) and NOD2 detect peptidoglycan fragments from the bacterial cell wall to trigger NF-κB and MAPK signalling 40 (FIG. 1b) . Distinct substructures of this bacterial cell wall product, termed muropeptides, are required for the activation of NOD1 and NOD2: NOD1 detects diaminopimelate (DAP)containing muropeptides, which are mainly found in Gram-negative organisms, whereas NOD2 recognizes muramyl dipeptide (MDP), which is found in all bacteria. DAP, as well as the d-amino acids that make up the stem peptides of peptidoglycan, is present only in bacteria, making it a unique signature to alert the host about microbial infection 40 . Another member of this family, NLRP3 (NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing 3), detects both microbial and endogenous danger signals, leading to formation of the caspase 1-dependent inflammasome and the consequent cleavage of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 to their active, secreted forms (FIG. 1b) . The stimulation of innate immunity through NLR activation is key to priming adaptive immunity, and NLR activators such as muropeptides have the potential to be used as vaccine adjuvants. Moreover, numerous studies have explored the potential to use immunomodulation through NLRs as an anti-infective strategy.

To date, NLR agonists have been used primarily to enhance both innate and adaptive immune responses. For example, the NLRP3 agonist alum is the most highly used adjuvant for vaccines, but its mode of action, as well as whether its activity in vivo requires NLRP3 activation, is still under debate 41,42 . However, alum is a poor inducer of T 1 immunity H (T helper 1 immunity). Similarly, stimulation of NOD2 by MDP 43,44 , a key component of Freund's complete adjuvant 45 ,  and stimulation of other NLRs induces adaptive immune activation skewed towards T 2 immunity H 46,47 . This has led to the design of secondgeneration adjuvants that combine alum with other additives, usually TLR agonists, to enhance overall potency

## REVIEWS

## T 1 immunity H

An immune response that is characterized by a subset of T helper (T ) cells that secrete H a particular set of cytokines, including interleukin-2 and interferonγ , the main function of which is to stimulate phagocytosis-mediated defences against intracellular pathogens.

## Freund's complete adjuvant

A mixture of heat-killed mycobacteria with mineral oil. When animals are immunized with antigen mixed with Freund's complete adjuvant, a strong immune response to the antigen is induced.

## T 2 immunity H

A type of immune response that is characterized by the production of interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5 and IL-13, and by humoral immunity mediated by B cells and immunoglobulin A (IgA) and IgE antibody classes; this response is mediated by T helper 2 (T 2) cells. H

## Intestinal crypts

Tubular invaginations of the intestinal epithelium. Crypts contain intestinal stem cells that continuously divide and are the source of all intestinal epithelial cells. Paneth cells are found at the base of the crypts and produce antimicrobial proteins and peptides, including phospholipase A2 and defensins.

and promote balanced T H 1/T 2 immunity 48 H . Testing of the potential for using NOD1 and NOD2 agonists, in particular as human vaccine adjuvants, is currently in its infancy, and further work is required to understand how these molecules boost adaptive immune responses to co-injected antigens. For example, Chiron/Novartis is carrying out a Phase I trial of an influenza vaccine using an adjuvant called phosphatidylethanolamine-linked muramyl tripeptide (MTP-PE; also known as mifamurtide), a NOD2 agonist 48 , with results still pending.

In addition to their potential use as adjuvants, many NOD agonists have been shown to have anti-infective properties. The first of these agonists to be exploited for a potential clinical application was an MDP derivative called murabutide, a NOD2 agonist with nonspecific immunomodulatory activities in individuals infected with HIV-1 (REF. 49) . Further evidence of such antiinfective properties came from early studies showing that NOD1 ligands have protective effects in mice when they are given orally or parenterally before systemic infection with different bacteria 50 . Since then, many studies have shown that pretreatment of mice with NOD agonists can enhance host protection against sepsis 51 , numerous bacterial infections (reviewed in REF. 52 ), viruses 53 and even parasites 54 . The protective effect of NOD agonists in these cases probably stems from their broad immunostimulatory properties, which enhance host protective functions at the cellular and tissue level by increasing the levels of protective factors such as nitric oxide 55 and pro-inflammatory cytokines, as well as the phagocytic capacity of immune cells (reviewed in REF. 52 ).

Interestingly, immunomodulatory muropeptides in combination with antibiotics offer greater resistance to infection with numerous pathogens (including bac  teria, parasites and fungi) than antibiotic treatment alone (reviewed in REF. 56 ). Moreover, the use of muropeptides in some cases lowers the effective dose of the antibiotics used. These findings suggest that muropeptides can serve as an adjunctive therapy to conventional antibiotics. The major drawback in the use of these combined regimens is that the muropeptides must be administered prophylactically to promote antiinfective immunity.

In contrast to the concept of upregulating NLR activity to enhance immune activation, the ability to block NLR function might be advantageous in some cases. A recent study showed that viral infection upregulates the expression and activity of NOD1, NOD2 and receptorinteracting protein 2 (RIP2; also known as RIPK2; a downstream effector kinase). However, when the viral challenge is followed by a bacterial infection (specifically, a norovirus challenge followed by superinfection with Escherichia coli in mice), the upregulated activity of the NOD pathway triggers uncontrolled inflammation and lethality 57 . Because secondary bacterial infections can often follow viral infections in humans, the use of NOD antagonists might act to blunt pro-inflammatory responses and decrease morbidity and mortality. To date, however, there are no known antagonists of NOD1 or NOD2 and only one known family of RIP2 inhibitors, which have secondary effects on the p38 kinase

pathway 58 . The use of small-molecule inhibitor screens to identify NOD antagonists and the discovery of novel and specific RIP2 inhibitors will probably open up new avenues for the modulation of these pathways that might improve treatment.

## Innate defence regulator peptides

Innate defence regulator (IDR) peptides are synthetic immunomodulatory and anti-infective compounds that are broadly based on the sequences of natural HDPs. These natural peptides are produced by innate immune cells, including leukocytes and epithelial cells, in all multi  cellular organisms , and their amino acid 8 composition is biased towards cationic and hydrophobic residues 59 .  The important role of HDPs in innate immune defences, particularly at mucosal surfaces and epithelial barriers, is demonstrated by their extreme diversity and abundance in all multicellular life forms , by the infection susceptibility phenotypes 8 of knockout mouse models 60 and by the increased susceptibility to infections in human conditions linked to reduced HDP production 61 .

Natural HDPs, such as α-defensins, tend to have weak direct antimicrobial activities under in vivo conditions, but these activities may be significant at certain sites, particularly at the high concentrations found within phagosomes of innate immune cells and in intestinal crypts . The direct antimicrobial activities of HDPs are due to the action of multiple microbial molecular targets, including membrane-associated and cytoplasmic enzymes and macromolecules, as well as bacterial membranes. However, in most extracellular environments, at physio  logical ionic strengths and modest concentrations, the anti-infective functions of natural peptides are probably primarily mediated through their diverse immunomodulatory effects on the host. The combination of immunostimulatory effects, such as chemokine induction and stimulation of cell differentiation, and regulatory activities, such as the suppression of pro-inflammatory cellular responses to LPS and IFNγ 62 , indicate that peptides act to promote a local non-inflammatory resolution of infections. This is a highly desirable mode of action, as it avoids the dangers associated with strong systemic pro-inflammatory responses.

Natural immunomodulatory HDPs provide general templates for the production of synthetic IDR peptides. Traditionally, peptide optimization efforts focused on the development of compounds that are optimized for direct killing of bacterial pathogens, although many of the drugs developed through this approach also have immunomodulatory activities and their in vivo functions may ultimately be mediated through a combination of these mechanisms. IDR1 was designed to have no direct antimicrobial activity but is protective in many animal models of multidrug-resistant infections, demonstrating that the protective effects of cationic peptides in vivo can be mediated entirely through immunomodulatory activity 63 . Indeed, immunomodulatory peptides offer many advantages, including lower potential for emergence of microbial resistance, lower toxicity to host cells and a requirement for fewer doses, addressing the issue of the

## Dendritic cells

Professional antigen-presenting cells that are found in the T cell areas of lymphoid tissues and as minor cellular components in most tissues. They have a branched, or dendritic, morphology and are the most potent stimulators of naive T cell responses.

## REVIEWS

## Table 2 | Innate defence regulator peptides that are in clinical trials to treat bacterial infections

Table is modified, with permission, from REF. 67 . BPI, bactericidal permeability-increasing protein; GVHD, graft-versus-host disease; IDR1, innate defence regulator peptide 1; MRSA, methicillin-resistant S. aureus .

| Peptide            | Sequence and/or structure                                                                          | Activity                                                                                                              | Potential clinical  applications                                                                    | Phase                    | Company                   |
|--------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------|
| EA-230             | 4 amino acid peptide                                                                               | Anti-inflammatory activity  in experimental endotoxin  challenge in healthy volunteers                                | Prevention of sepsis, and  protection against renal failure  following cardiac surgery              | Phase I-II               | Exponential  Biotherapies |
| hLF1-11            | 11 amino acid cationic  peptide, a fragment of  lactoferricin                                      | Direct antibacterial and  antifungal activity, and  stimulation of innate immunity                                    | Prevention of infections in  immunocompromised patients                                             | Phase I                  | AM-Pharma                 |
| IC-31              | Synthetic cationic  peptide (KLKL KLK) in  5 combination with a synthetic  oligonucleotide (ODN1a) | Potent adjuvant activity  in formulation with  immunostimulatory  oligonucleotides in animal  models                  | Component of an adjuvant  formulation in a novel vaccine  against tuberculosis                      | Phase I                  | Intercell                 |
| IMX-942            | 5 amino acid synthetic cationic  peptide loosely derived from  indolicidin and IDR1                | Immunomodulatory, with no  antimicrobial activity; shows  protective effects in mouse  models of antibiotic-resistant | Prevention of infections in  immunosuppressed patients  undergoing chemotherapy for  cancer         | Phase II                 | Inimex  Pharmaceuticals   |
| MSI-78             | 22 amino acid cationic peptide  derived from magainin                                              | Antibacterial activity; potential  immunomodulatory activity  unknown                                                 | Treatment of foot ulcers in  patients with diabetes                                                 | Phase III                | MacroChem                 |
| MX-226  (omiganan) | 12 amino acid cationic peptide  derived from indolicidin                                           | Direct antimicrobial and  immunomodulatory activity                                                                   | Topical antiseptic for the  prevention of catheter  infections                                      | Phase III                | BioWest  Therapeutics     |
| Opebacan           | 21 amino acid peptide derived  from BPI                                                            | Antibacterial and  anti-inflammatory activity                                                                         | Treatment of endotoxaemia  and GVHD in patients receiving  bone marrow transplantations             | Phase I-II  (terminated) | XOMA                      |
| PMX-30063          | Small-molecule structural  mimetic of defensin                                                     | Antibacterial activity  against MRSA; potential  immunomodulatory activity  unknown                                   | Treatment of acute  Staphylococcus aureus  skin  infections                                         | Phase II                 | PolyMedix                 |
| XOMA-629           | 9 amino acid peptide derived  from BPI                                                             | Direct antibacterial activity;  immunomodulatory activity  unknown                                                    | Treatment of impetigo  skin infections caused by  Staphylococcus aureus and  Streptococcus pyogenes | Phase IIA                | XOMA                      |

high cost of peptide drugs. However, in the long term, optimal peptides might combine antimicrobial and immunomodulatory properties or add to their immunomodulatory activity one of the other properties that are known to be present in cationic peptides, including an ability to inhibit biofilm growth 64 or promote wound healing 65,66 .

Several recent clinical trials have tested the efficacy of peptide-based therapeutics , including those of pep9 tides developed entirely for their immunomodulatory effects 63 , those of peptides originally developed as microbicidal drugs but also known to have immunomodulatory properties and those of compounds with potent direct antimicrobial but untested immunomodulatory activities 67 (TABLE 2) . The medical conditions that are targeted by the ongoing clinical trials of peptide-based drugs reflect the combined immunostimulatory and regulatory properties of this class of compound. These conditions include bacterial infections, such as infections with antibiotic-resistant pathogens, and inflammatory disorders, such as endotoxaemia and sepsis. Most clinical trials to date have focused on topical applications, such as treatment of skin infections and

inflammation, although safe systemic administration, in particular of immunomodulatory peptides, has also been demonstrated.

## Bacterial signalling molecules

Certain microbial signalling molecules, including Nacyl homoserine lactones (AHLs) and cyclic nucleotides, can also modulate host immune responses.

Cyclic nucleotides stimulate immune responses. Cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) and c-di-AMP are important second-messenger molecules that are used in signal transduction in a wide range of bacteria. Mammalian cells also respond to these molecules 68 . Indeed, c-diGMP attenuates the bacterial burden in a mouse model of Staphylococcus aureus infection independently of its effects on bacterial intercellular communication 69 . Furthermore, treatment of dendritic cells with c-di-GMP leads to the upregulation of numerous co-stimulatory molecules and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-8, IL-12 and CC-chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) 70 . It was also found that c-di-GMP has adjuvant activity: injection of c-di-GMP along with

## REVIEWS

A microbial cell-cell communication process that uses small signalling molecules to allow bacteria to coordinate population behaviour, in part in response to cell density.

an antigen results in enhanced immunogenicity, and gives balanced T H 1/T 2 immunity when given systemiH cally and T H 1-skewed responses when administered mucosally 71 . Similar adjuvant activities were recently described for c-di-AMP 72 .

Both c-di-GMP and c-di-AMP are detected in the host cytosol, and c-di-GMP was recently shown to be directly detected by stimulator of IFN genes (STING; also known as TMEM173) 73 . This engages a defence response that triggers the activation of the MAPK and STING-TBK1-IRF3 (STING-TANK-binding kinase 1IFN-regulatory factor 3) signalling pathways. These downstream pathways, in turn, activate the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and type I IFNs 74,75 , respectively, which have integral roles in anti-infective immunity (FIG. 2a) . Further research is required to unleash the potential of these microbial molecules as immunomodulators and vaccine adjuvants. As with the other immunomodulators of microbial origin, the key will be to find a balance between the ability of these molecules to enhance antimicrobial responses and their pro-inflammatory potential.

AHLs as immunomodulators. AHLs are small molecules that are found exclusively in bacteria and are used as second messengers to communicate among organisms within a population in a process known as quorum sensing 76 , but they also have other roles, for example, during virulence and biofilm formation. Numerous Gram-negative bacteria, including pathogens, produce AHLs; P. aeruginosa , which often infects patients with cystic fibrosis, is one example 77 . Similarly to c-di-AMP and c-di-GMP , AHLs possess immunomodulatory activities in mammalian hosts, although their host receptors are unknown. In vitro , AHLs have a range of effects on host cells, from the induction of apoptosis and pro-inflammatory cytokines to potent effects on dampening inflammation (reviewed in REF. 78 ). Although these effects are perplexing, they might be cell type specific and depend on the concentration of the AHL used in the particular study. For example, the AHL N -(3-oxododecanoyl)l-homoserine lactone (3O-C 12 -HSL) induces higher levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 in airway epithelial cells from patients with cystic fibrosis than in control cells, a factor that could contribute to the pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis 79 . Consistent with AHLs having a range of effects on host cells, these molecules have been shown to activate the p38 MAPK pathway and to inhibit the pro-inflammatory NF-κB pathway (FIG. 2b) . Conversely, their potential interference with PPARγ (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ), a nuclear receptor protein that functions as a transcription factor to dampen inflammation, would activate the host immune response and thereby modulate inflammation 78 .

The potential to use AHLs as an adjunctive antiinfective therapy remains largely unexplored, although recent findings show the potential for using AHLs to treat infectious diseases. One recent study found that AHLs have a protective role: when mice are treated with 3O-C 12 -HSL before infection with the Gram-negative pathogen Aeromonas hydrophila , they have enhanced

survival and increased numbers of neutrophils in the blood compared with mice that are not pre-treated with the AHL. In vitro , 3O-C 12 -HSL-treated immune cells exhibit enhanced phagocytic activity, which might lower the bacterial burden and increase survival in mouse infection models 80 . An important direction for the future will be to investigate whether AHLs can also be used as preventive therapy.

Because AHLs have a role in quorum sensing, blocking bacterial communication through AHLs is another potential strategy for the treatment of infectious diseases 81 . Such inhibitors act as antagonists of AHL receptors in bacteria and have the advantage of dampening virulence but not growth, thereby minimizing the potential for the development of resistance. Several screening efforts have focused on identifying small-molecule and natural-product inhibitors that interfere with interbacterial communication to suppress biofilm formation and limit the expression of virulence genes. For example, blocking quorum sensing either by immunization 82 or by the use of small-molecule inhibitors 83 reduces mortality in a mouse model of P. aeruginosa lung infection, which indicates that quorum sensing inhibitors could be an option for the treatment of patients with cystic fibrosis. Moreover, garlic, which also inhibits quorum sensing, is being tested in clinical trials for the treatment of lung infections in patients with cystic fibrosis 84 . Quorum sensing inhibitors might also be important adjuncts to antibiotic therapy, as their use increases the susceptibility of bacterial biofilms to antibiotics both in vitro and in vivo 85 . Continued research in this area will probably identify effective quorum sensing control strategies that will establish new avenues for the treatment of patients with cystic fibrosis and P. aeruginosa infection, and also for the treatment of other infectious diseases. A caveat to the use of such molecules (or their analogues) as immune modulators is their potential for deleterious modulation of bacterial signalling; for example, they could promote virulence factor production or biofilm formation and/or exert important side effects on the commensal flora.

## Perspectives

In this era of emerging pathogens and the re-emergence of many infectious diseases in the setting of rampant antibiotic resistance, the need to develop new antimicrobial strategies is imperative. Here, we have discussed strategies to boost antimicrobial therapy by supporting both innate and adaptive immune responses in the host. The goal in the future will be to explore the potential of some of these anti-infective therapies in combination with antibiotics as a potent way to control infectious diseases. Many of the strategies outlined in this Review have the benefit of being intrinsically unable to engender resistance. The potential caveat to their exploitation in the clinic, however, is the need to find the proper balance that generates an effective immune response and suppresses infection but also limits damaging inflammation. Indeed, immunomodulators are often inherently nonspecific in their boosting of immune responses. It will therefore be necessary to determine the consequences of such boosting when it is overlaid with

- a Innate immune activation by cyclic nucleotides

## b Innate immune activation by AHLs

<!-- image -->

Nature Reviews   Microbiology | Figure 2 | Bacterial quorum sensing second-messenger molecules stimulate innate immune activation in mammalian cells. a | The cyclic nucleotides cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) and c-di-AMP , which are used in interbacterial communication, are released from different bacteria and gain entry into host cells. Stimulator of IFN genes (STING) has been shown recently to directly sense cyclic dinucleotides, leading to activation of the TBK1-IRF3 (TANK-binding kinase 1-IFN-regulatory factor 3) pathway, and the subsequent production of type I interferons (IFNs). STING has also been proposed to upregulate pro-inflammatory cytokines through the induction of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling, although the mechanism of this induction is currently unknown. b | N -acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs) are another class of quorum sensing molecule in bacteria. These molecules have been shown to modulate host immune responses in both a positive and negative way. AHLs enter into mammalian cells and trigger apoptosis, modulate immune responses by inhibiting nuclear factorκ B (NFκ B) and the activity of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptorγ ( PPAR ), and trigger stress pathways that result in the activation of p38 and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 γ α ( eIF2 α) . These events culminate in attenuation of innate immune responses (by inhibiting pro-inflammatory pathways) or enhancement of immune responses (by inhibiting anti-inflammatory pathways).

<!-- image -->

the natural perturbations of innate immunity that occur during human diseases (for example, whether TLR agonists reinforce the pro-inflammatory effects of microbial signature molecules or DAMPs). This will probably require detailed mechanistic studies at a systems level in appropriate animal models.

The development of TLR-targeting therapies, which have enjoyed the greatest success to date, will be increasingly facilitated by an appreciation of the massive complexity of the immune system, which will lead to the expanded application of bioinformatics and systems biology to models of host-pathogen interactions and the use of such models in the development of immunomodulatory therapeutics 86 . In addition, structural data showing the molecular interactions of TLRs with their ligands will be useful for defining the specific structural requirements for optimal ligand activity 87-89 . A better understanding of the mechanisms of immunological memory will result in optimized applications of TLR agonists and the design of adjuvants that can specifically stimulate innate immunity to induce long-term adaptive immune responses. Interestingly, it was recently shown that primary immune responses to many common adjuvants are independent of TLR stimulation 90 , but that the combined stimulation of several TLRs leads to synergistic improvements in the induction of immunological memory and in the long-term protective activity of a vaccine 91 . The methods of formulation and delivery of

such vaccines and of immunomodulatory antimicrobial drugs are also continually being improved 92 . The safety of all new TLR agonists and administration protocols will need to be carefully examined, as acute TLR stimulation can induce inflammation and immune-mediated damage to the host, and chronic TLR stimulation can result in endotoxin tolerance and immune paralysis, potentially impairing defences against infections 93 . Nevertheless, the clinical use of the TLR4 agonist and adjuvant monophosphoryl lipid A (MPL) and of other TLR agonists (TABLE 1) indicates that safe application of TLR agonists to stimulate immune responses is feasible.

It is worth mentioning that many of the studies cited here have focused on the prophylactic use of immunomodulatory compounds to boost immunity against subsequent infections. The results from these studies suggest that certain immunomodulators will be useful in preventing infections (for example, when administered to immunodeficient individuals or on admission of patients to hospitals to avert nosocomial infections), although many of the agents highlighted in TABLE 1 (such as imiquimod) are used or designed as therapeutics. Future studies must address the potential therapeutic uses of PRR agonists, IDR peptides and quorum sensing molecules in helping to clear established bacterial infections, either alone or in combination with antibiotics.

## REVIEWS

## REVIEWS

One of the exciting future approaches will be the development of IDR peptides. These peptides show great promise owing to their selective action on innate immunity 63 , their potential for both prophylactic and therapeutic usage 56,65 and their ability to enhance the performance of vaccine adjuvants 94,95 . The optimization of peptide sequences for protective activity against infections and for other in vivo applications is an important goal of ongoing research. This requires identifying a peptide activity that is easily assessed in vitro and that correlates with in vivo protection against infection, and then finding the optimal peptide sequence that enhances this in vitro activity but retains low toxicity and other properties that are compatible with in vivo application. The direct antimicrobial activity of peptides against a range of bacterial pathogens has been successfully optimized using similar approaches involving high-throughput production of iterative peptide libraries combined with in vitro screening for inhibition of bacterial growth 96 . This work has been further advanced by computer-aided approaches to predict the antimicrobial activity of a range of peptide sequences on the basis of a small experimental data set of structurally diverse peptides and mathematical modelling 97,98 . Optimization of immunomodulatory peptides using similar approaches is more challenging, as the precise combination of biological activities required to aid in the resolution of a particular infection has proved difficult to establish. However, significant progress has been made (TABLE 2) . Sequence modification of natural peptides with known immunomodulatory activities has demonstrated major promise. For example, truncated derivatives of human cathelicidin family peptide LL-37 have been created and found to have enhanced chemokine induction activity 99 , and antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory therapeutic peptides have been generated from human bactericidal permeability-increasing protein (for example, XOMA-629). A fragment of human lactoferricin (hLF1-11) with immunostimulatory and anti-infective properties has been identified and has entered clinical trials. Immunomodulatory peptide IDR1 (REF. 63) was generated through iterative

- 1 . Clark, I. A. The advent of the cytokine storm. Immunol. Cell Biol. 85 , 271-273 (2007).
- 2 . Ulevitch, R. J. Therapeutics targeting the innate immune system. Nature Rev. Immunol. 4 , 512-520 (2004).
- 3 . Hamill, P ., Brown, K., Jenssen, H. &amp; Hancock, R. E. Novel anti-infectives: is host defence the answer? Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 19 , 628-636 (2008).
- 4 . Yang, Y. F. et al. Long-term efficacy of interferon α therapy on hepatitis B viral replication in patients with chronic hepatitis B: a meta-analysis. Antiviral Res. 85 , 361-365 (2010).
- 5 . Jiang, X. R. et al. Advances in the assessment and control of the effector functions of therapeutic antibodies. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 10 , 101-111 (2011).
- 6 . Scherer, A. &amp; McLean, A. Mathematical models of vaccination. Br. Med. Bull. 62 , 187-199 (2002).
- 7 . Karin, M., Lawrence, T . &amp; Nizet, V. Innate immunity gone awry: linking microbial infections to chronic inflammation and cancer. Cell 124 , 823-835 (2006).
- 8 . Zasloff, M. Antimicrobial peptides of multicellular organisms. Nature 415 , 389-395 (2002).
- 9 . Fjell, C. D., Hiss, J. A., Hancock, R. E. W. &amp; Schneider, G. Designing antimicrobial peptides: form

sequence modifications and truncations of the natural bovine peptide bactenecin. In addition, enhanced in vitro chemokine induction activity in the peptide libraries of synthetic bactenecin derivatives has been shown to correlate with improved protection against infection in animal models, suggesting that optimization of peptide sequences for chemokine induction in vitro is a feasible approach for improving the in vivo activities of anti-infective peptides 100 . Furthermore, the in vivo stability of peptides can be enhanced through the use of d-amino acid peptides, retro-inverso peptides or synthetic peptidomimetics that are resistant to protease degradation 101 .

Better methods for the formulation and delivery of immunomodulatory peptides, and approaches taking advantage of the synergistic activities of these peptides with other immune mediators, will continue to facilitate their clinical development. For example, IC-31, comprising a synthetic cationic peptide administered together with an immunostimulatory oligonucleotide, is currently in clinical trials as an adjuvant for a novel M. tuberculosis vaccine 94,95 , and the synergistic activities of cationic peptides with oligonucleotides in type I IFN induction 102,103 may have a role in the immunogenicity of such formulations. Finally, a class of immunomodulatory therapies designed to boost defences against infection by stimulating the production of natural peptides is an exciting new avenue and might provide a cheaper alternative to the administration of synthetic peptides. As an example, vitamin D is an effective inducer of natural cathelicidin peptide LL-37 in human skin and in innate immune cells, and this is thought to underlie the deleterious effects of vitamin D deficiency on immunity to M. tuberculosis 104,105 . In addition, butyrate administration in animal models was shown to improve the outcome of Shigella flexneri infection through induction of LL-37 in the colon 106 .

We are rapidly approaching the antibiotic resistance era, which is coupled to a dearth of antibiotic discovery. A new generation of immunomodulatory therapeutics for infectious diseases has enormous potential to compensate for this major health care challenge.

- follows function. Nature Rev Drug Discov 11 , 37-51 (2011).
- 10 . Trinchieri, G. &amp; Sher, A. Cooperation of T oll-like receptor signals in innate immune defence. Nature Rev. Immunol. 7 , 179-190 (2007).
- 11 . Medzhitov, R., Preston-Hurlburt, P . &amp; Janeway, C. A. Jr. A human homologue of the Drosophila Toll protein signals activation of adaptive immunity. Nature 388 , 394-397 (1997).
- 12 . Poltorak, A. et al. Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in Tlr4 gene. Science 282 , 2085-2088 (1998).
- 13 . Ferwerda, B. et al. Functional consequences of Toll-like receptor 4 polymorphisms. Mol. Med. 14 , 346-352 (2008).
- 14 . Hennessy, E. J., Parker, A. E. &amp; O'Neill, L. A. T argeting Toll-like receptors: emerging therapeutics? Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 9 , 293-307 (2010). A highly comprehensive review of the ongoing development of TLR agonists and antagonists for
- therapeutic applications.
- 15 . Zaheer, S. A. et al. Combined multidrug and Mycobacterium w vaccine therapy in patients with multibacillary leprosy. J. Infect. Dis. 167 , 401-410 (1993).

- 16 . Klinman, D. M., Xie, H. &amp; Ivins, B. E. CpG oligonucleotides improve the protective immune response induced by the licensed anthrax vaccine. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 1082 , 137-150 (2006).
- 17 . Pastorelli, L., Pizarro, T . T ., Cominelli, F . &amp; Vecchi, M. Emerging drugs for the treatment of ulcerative colitis. Expert Opin. Emerg. Drugs 14 , 505-521 (2009).
- 18 . Rozy, A. &amp; Chorostowska-Wynimko, J. Bacterial immunostimulants - mechanism of action and clinical application in respiratory diseases. Pneumonol. Alergol. Pol. 76 , 353-359 (2008).
- 19 . Ruah, S. B., Ruah, C., van Aubel, A., Abel, S. &amp; Elsasser, U. Efficacy of a polyvalent bacterial lysate in children with recurrent respiratory tract infections. Adv. Ther. 18 , 151-162 (2001).
- 20 . Dittmer, U. &amp; Olbrich, A. R. T reatment of infectious diseases with immunostimulatory oligodeoxynucleotides containing CpG motifs. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 6 , 472-477 (2003).
- 21 . Evans, S. E. et al. Stimulated innate resistance of lung epithelium protects mice broadly against bacteria and fungi. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 42 , 40-50 (2009).
- 22 . Munoz, N. et al. Mucosal administration of flagellin protects mice from Streptococcus pneumoniae lung infection. Infect. Immun. 78 , 4226-4233 (2010).
- 23 . Yu, F. S. et al. Flagellin stimulates protective lung mucosal immunity: role of cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide. J. Immunol. 185 , 1142-1149 (2010).
- 24 . Kinnebrew, M. A. et al. Bacterial flagellin stimulates Toll-like receptor 5-dependent defense against vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus infection. J. Infect. Dis. 201 , 534-543 (2010).
- 25 . Clement, C. G. et al. Stimulation of lung innate immunity protects against lethal pneumococcal pneumonia in mice. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 177 , 1322-1330 (2008).
- 26 . Ireland, R. et al. Effective, broad spectrum control of virulent bacterial infections using cationic DNA liposome complexes combined with bacterial antigens. PLoS Pathog. 6 , e1000921 (2010).
- 27 . Tuvim, M. J., Evans, S. E., Clement, C. G., Dickey, B. F. &amp; Gilbert, B. E. Augmented lung inflammation protects against influenza A pneumonia. PLoS ONE 4 , e4176 (2009).
- 28 . Shinya, K. et al. T oll-like receptor pre-stimulation protects mice against lethal infection with highly pathogenic influenza viruses. Virol. J. 8 , 97 (2011).
- 29 . Antonelli, L. R. et al. Intranasal Poly-IC treatment exacerbates tuberculosis in mice through the pulmonary recruitment of a pathogen-permissive monocyte/macrophage population. J. Clin. Invest. 120 , 1674-1682 (2010).
- 30 . Hotchkiss, R. S. &amp; Karl, I. E. The pathophysiology and treatment of sepsis. N. Engl. J. Med. 348 , 138-150 (2003).
- An overview of the complex immune-mediated pathophysiology of sepsis and the complexities of treating patients with sepsis using immunomodulatory therapies.
- 31 . Rice, T . W. et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial of TAK-242 for the treatment of severe sepsis. Crit. Care Med. 38 , 1685-1694 (2010).
- 32 . Tidswell, M. et al. Phase 2 trial of eritoran tetrasodium (E5564), a Toll-like receptor 4 antagonist, in patients with severe sepsis. Crit. Care Med. 38 , 72-83 (2010).
- 33 . Barochia, A., Solomon, S., Cui, X., Natanson, C. &amp; Eichacker, P . Q. Eritoran tetrasodium (E5564) treatment for sepsis: review of preclinical and clinical studies. Expert Opin. Drug Metab. T oxicol. 7 , 479-494 (2011).
- 34 . Ungaro, R. et al. A novel T oll-like receptor 4 antagonist antibody ameliorates inflammation but impairs mucosal healing in murine colitis. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 296 , G1167-G1179 (2009).
- 35 . Rakoff-Nahoum, S., Paglino, J., Eslami-Varzaneh, F., Edberg, S. &amp; Medzhitov, R. Recognition of commensal microflora by T oll-like receptors is required for intestinal homeostasis. Cell 118 , 229-241 (2004).
- 36 . Abreu, M. T. T oll-like receptor signalling in the intestinal epithelium: how bacterial recognition shapes intestinal function. Nature Rev. Immunol. 10 , 131-144 (2010).
- 37 . Dupaul-Chicoine, J. et al. Control of intestinal homeostasis, colitis, and colitis-associated colorectal cancer by the inflammatory caspases. Immunity 32 , 367-378 (2010).
- 38 . Zaph, C. et al. Epithelial-cell-intrinsic IKKβ expression regulates intestinal immune homeostasis. Nature 446 , 552-556 (2007).
- 39 . Werts, C., Rubino, S., Ling, A., Girardin, S. E. &amp; Philpott, D. J. Nod-like receptors in intestinal homeostasis, inflammation, and cancer. J. Leukoc. Biol. 90 , 471-482 (2011).
- 40 . Sorbara, M. &amp; Philpott, D. Peptidoglycan: a critical activator of the mammalian immune system during infection and homeostasis. Immunol. Rev. 243 , 40-60 (2011).
- A review of how peptidoglycan recognition shapes the mammalian immune response.
- 41 . Leemans, J. C., Cassel, S. L. &amp; Sutterwala, F. S. Sensing damage by the NLRP3 inflammasome. Immunol. Rev. 243 , 152-162 (2011).
- 42 . Spreafico, R., Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P . &amp; Mortellaro, A. The controversial relationship between NLRP3, alum, danger signals and the next-generation adjuvants. Eur. J. Immunol. 40 , 638-642 (2010).
- 43 . Girardin, S. E. et al. Nod2 is a general sensor of peptidoglycan through muramyl dipeptide (MDP) detection. J. Biol. Chem. 278 , 8869-8872 (2003).
- 44 . Inohara, N. et al. Host recognition of bacterial muramyl dipeptide mediated through NOD2. Implications for Crohn's disease. J. Biol. Chem. 278 , 5509-5512 (2003).

- 45 . Chedid, L., Audibert, F. &amp; Johnson, A. G. Biological activities of muramyl dipeptide, a synthetic glycopeptide analogous to bacterial immunoregulating agents. Prog. Allergy 25 , 63-105 (1978).
- 46 . Fritz, J. H., et al. Nod1-mediated innate immune recognition of peptidoglycan contributes to the onset of adaptive immunity. Immunity 26 , 445-459 (2007).
- 47 . Magalhaes, J. G. et al. Nucleotide oligomerization domain-containing proteins instruct T cell helper type 2 immunity through stromal activation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108 , 14896-14901 (2011).
- 48 . O'Hagan, D. T. &amp; De Gregorio, E. The path to a successful vaccine adjuvant - 'the long and winding road' . Drug Discov. Today 14 , 541-551 (2009).
- 49 . Bahr, G. M. Non-specific immunotherapy of HIV-1 infection: potential use of the synthetic immunodulator murabutide. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 51 , 5-8 (2003).
- 50 . Mine, Y. et al. Immunoactive peptides, FK-156 and FK-565. I. Enhancement of host resistance to microbial infection in mice. J. Antibiot. (T okyo) 36 , 1045-1050 (1983).
- 51 . Wardowska, A. et al. Analogues of muramyl dipeptide (MDP) and tuftsin limit infection and inflammation in murine model of sepsis. Vaccine 27 , 369-374 (2009).
- 52 . Geddes, K., Magalhaes, J. G. &amp; Girardin, S. E. Unleashing the therapeutic potential of NOD-like receptors. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 8 , 465-479 (2009).
- 53 . Fukushima, A. et al. Effect of MDP-Lys(L18) as a mucosal immunoadjuvant on protection of mucosal infections by Sendai virus and rotavirus. Vaccine 14 , 485-491 (1996).
- 54 . Sarkar, K. &amp; Das, P . K. Protective effect of neoglycoprotein-conjugated muramyl dipeptide against Leishmania donovani infection: the role of cytokines. J. Immunol. 158 , 5357-5365 (1997).
- 55 . Le Bourhis, L. et al. Role of Nod1 in mucosal dendritic cells during Salmonella pathogenicity island 1-independent Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection. Infect. Immun. 77 , 4480-4486 (2009).
- 56 . O'Reilly, T . &amp; Zak, O. Enhancement of the effectiveness of antimicrobial therapy by muramyl peptide immunomodulators. Clin. Infect. Dis. 14 , 1100-1109 (1992).
- 57 . Kim, Y. G. et al. Viral infection augments Nod1/2 signaling to potentiate lethality associated with secondary bacterial infections. Cell Host Microbe 9 , 496-507 (2011).
- 58 . Argast, G. M., Fausto, N. &amp; Campbell, J. S. Inhibition of RIP2/RICK/CARDIAK activity by pyridinyl imidazole inhibitors of p38 MAPK. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 268 , 129-140 (2005).
- 59 . Hancock, R. E. &amp; Sahl, H. G. Antimicrobial and hostdefense peptides as new anti-infective therapeutic strategies. Nature Biotech. 24 , 1551-1557 (2006).
- 60 . Nizet, V. et al. Innate antimicrobial peptide protects the skin from invasive bacterial infection. Nature 414 , 454-457 (2001).
- 61 . Ong, P. Y. et al. Endogenous antimicrobial peptides and skin infections in atopic dermatitis. N. Engl. J. Med. 347 , 1151-1160 (2002).
- 62 . Nijnik, A., Pistolic, J., Wyatt, A., T am, S. &amp; Hancock, R. E. Human cathelicidin peptide LL-37 modulates the effects of IFNγ on APCs. J. Immunol. 183 , 5788-5798 (2009).
- 63 . Scott, M. G. et al. An anti-infective peptide that selectively modulates the innate immune response. Nature Biotech. 25 , 465-472 (2007). A study demonstrating that a synthetic immunomodulatory peptide with no direct antimicrobial activity can offer protection against antibiotic-resistant infections in mouse models, while inhibiting an excessive inflammatory response.
- 64 . Overhage, J. et al. The human host defence peptide LL-37 prevents bacterial biofilm formation. Infect Immun. 76 , 4176-4182 (2008).
- 65 . Carretero, M. et al. In vitro and in vivo wound healingpromoting activities of human cathelicidin LL-37. J. Invest. Dermatol. 128 , 223-236 (2008).
- 66 . Hirsch, T . et al. Human beta-defensin-3 promotes wound healing in infected diabetic wounds. J. Gene Med. 11 , 220-228 (2009).
- 67 . Easton, D. M., Nijnik, A., Mayer, M. L. &amp; Hancock, peptides as novel anti-infectives.
- R. E. Potential of immunomodulatory host defense Trends Biotechnol. 27 , 582-590 (2009). A recent comprehensive review of the ongoing development of synthetic peptides as immunomodulatory therapeutics.

## REVIEWS

- 68 . Karaolis, D. K. et al. 3 ,5 ' 'cyclic diguanylic acid (c-di-GMP) inhibits basal and growth factor-stimulated human colon cancer cell proliferation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 329 , 40-45 (2005).
- 69 . Brouillette, E., Hyodo, M., Hayakawa, Y., Karaolis, D. K. &amp; Malouin, F. 3 ,5 ' 'cyclic diguanylic acid reduces the virulence of biofilm-forming Staphylococcus aureus strains in a mouse model of mastitis infection. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49 , 3109-3113 (2005).
- 70 . Karaolis, D. K. et al. Bacterial c-di-GMP is an immunostimulatory molecule. J. Immunol. 178 , 2171-2181 (2007).
- 71 . Chen, W., Kuolee, R. &amp; Yan, H. The potential of 3 ,5 ' 'cyclic diguanylic acid (c-di-GMP) as an effective vaccine adjuvant. Vaccine 28 , 3080-3085 (2010).
- 72 . Ebensen, T. et al. Bis-(3 ,5 )-cyclic dimeric adenosine ' ' monophosphate: strong Th1/Th2/Th17 promoting mucosal adjuvant. Vaccine 29 , 5210-5220 (2011).
- 73 . Burdette, D. L. et al. STING is a direct innate immune sensor of cyclic di-GMP . Nature 478 , 515-518 (2011).
- 74 . Sauer, J. D. et al. The NethylNnitrosourea-induced Goldenticket mouse mutant reveals an essential function of Sting in the in vivo interferon response to Listeria monocytogenes and cyclic dinucleotides. Infect. Immun. 79 , 688-694 (2011).
- 75 . Woodward, J. J., Iavarone, A. T . &amp; Portnoy, D. A. c-diAMP secreted by intracellular Listeria monocytogenes activates a host type I interferon response. Science 328 , 1703-1705 (2010).
- 76 . Camilli, A. &amp; Bassler, B. L. Bacterial small-molecule signaling pathways. Science 311 , 1113-1116 (2006).
- 77 . Smith, R. S., Harris, S. G., Phipps, R. &amp; Iglewski, B. The Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum-sensing molecule N -(3-oxododecanoyl)homoserine lactone contributes to virulence and induces inflammation in vivo. J. Bacteriol. 184 , 1132-1139 (2002).
- 78 . Teplitski, M., Mathesius, U. &amp; Rumbaugh, K. P. Perception and degradation of N -acyl homoserine lactone quorum sensing signals by mammalian and plant cells. Chem. Rev. 111 , 100-116 (2011). A thorough overview of the mechanisms of 'cross-kingdom' communication by quorum sensing molecules.
- 79 . Mayer, M. L., Sheridan, J. A., Blohmke, C. J., T urvey, S. E. &amp; Hancock, R. E. The Pseudomonas aeruginosa autoinducer 3O-C12 homoserine lactone provokes hyperinflammatory responses from cystic fibrosis airway epithelial cells. PLoS ONE 6 , e16246 (2011).
- 80 . Khajanchi, B. K., Kirtley, M. L., Brackman, S. M. &amp; Chopra, A. K. Immunomodulatory and protective roles of quorum-sensing signaling molecules N -acyl homoserine lactones during infection of mice with Aeromonas hydrophila  Infect. Immun. . 79 , 2646-2657 (2011).
- 81 . Mattmann, M. E. &amp; Blackwell, H. E. Small molecules that modulate quorum sensing and control virulence in Pseudomonas aeruginosa . J. Org. Chem. 75 , 6737-6746 (2010).
- A discussion about the strategies that can be used to interfere with quorum sensing pathways in Pseudomonas aeruginosa to potentially affect therapies.
- 82 . Miyairi, S. et al. Immunization with 3-oxododecanoyll -homoserine lactone-protein conjugate protects mice from lethal Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection. J. Med. Microbiol. 55 , 1381-1387 (2006).
- 83 . Wu, H. et al. Synthetic furanones inhibit quorumsensing and enhance bacterial clearance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection in mice. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 53 , 1054-1061 (2004).
- 84 . Smyth, A. R. et al. Garlic as an inhibitor of Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum sensing in cystic fibrosis-a pilot randomized controlled trial. Pediatr. Pulmonol. 45 , 356-362 (2010).
- 85 . Brackman, G., Cos, P., Maes, L., Nelis, H. J. &amp; Coenye, T. Quorum sensing inhibitors increase the susceptibility of bacterial biofilms to antibiotics in vitro and in vivo. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55 , 2655-2661 (2011).
- 86 . Gardy, J. L., Lynn, D. J., Brinkman, F. S. &amp; Hancock, R. E. Enabling a systems biology approach to immunology: focus on innate immunity. Trends Immunol. 30 , 249-262 (2009). A review of the applications of bioinformatics and systems biology in the study of innate immunity and host-pathogen interactions, including many references to online resources, such as databases and software tools, that are openly available to the scientific community.

## REVIEWS

- 87 . Park, B. S. et al. The structural basis of lipopolysaccharide recognition by the TLR4-MD-2 complex. Nature 458 , 1191-1195 (2009).
- 88 . Jin, M. S. et al. Crystal structure of the TLR1-TLR2 heterodimer induced by binding of a tri-acylated lipopeptide. Cell 130 , 1071-1082 (2007).
- 89 . Choe, J., Kelker, M. S. &amp; Wilson, I. A. Crystal structure of human Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) ectodomain. Science 309 , 581-585 (2005).
- 90 . Gavin, A. L. et al. Adjuvant-enhanced antibody responses in the absence of T oll-like receptor signaling. Science 314 , 1936-1938 (2006).
- 91 . Kasturi, S. P . et al. Programming the magnitude and persistence of antibody responses with innate immunity. Nature 470 , 543-547 (2011). A recent study demonstrating that ligation of multiple TLRs by vaccine adjuvants is required for induction of long-term antibody responses and immunological memory.
- 92 . Guy, B. The perfect mix: recent progress in adjuvant research. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 5 , 505-517 (2007).
- 93 . Biswas, S. K. &amp; Lopez-Collazo, E. Endotoxin tolerance: new mechanisms, molecules and clinical significance. Trends Immunol. 30 , 475-487 (2009).
- 94 . Schellack, C. et al. IC31, a novel adjuvant signaling via TLR9, induces potent cellular and humoral immune responses. Vaccine 24 , 5461-5472 (2006).
- 95 . van Dissel, J. T . et al. Ag85B-ESAT-6 adjuvanted with IC31® promotes strong and long-lived Mycobacterium tuberculosis specific T cell responses in volunteers with previous BCG vaccination or tuberculosis infection. Vaccine 29 , 2100-2109 (2011).
- 96 . Hilpert, K., Volkmer-Engert, R., Walter, T . &amp; Hancock, R. E. High-throughput generation of small antibacterial peptides with improved activity. Nature Biotech. 23 , 1008-1012 (2005).
- 97 . Jenssen, H., Fjell, C. D., Cherkasov, A. &amp; Hancock, R. E. QSAR modeling and computer-aided design of antimicrobial peptides. J. Pept. Sci. 14 , 110-114 (2008).
- 98 . Loose, C., Jensen, K., Rigoutsos, I. &amp; Stephanopoulos, G. A linguistic model for the rational design of antimicrobial peptides. Nature 443 , 867-869 (2006).
- 99 . Braff, M. H. et al. Structure-function relationships among human cathelicidin peptides: dissociation of antimicrobial properties from host immunostimulatory activities. J. Immunol. 174 , 4271-4278 (2005).
- 100 . Nijnik, A. et al. Synthetic cationic peptide IDR-1002 provides protection against bacterial infections through chemokine induction and enhanced leukocyte recruitment. J. Immunol. 184 , 2539-2550 (2010).
- 101 .  Fischer, P . M. The design, synthesis and application of stereochemical and directional peptide isomers: a critical review. Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 4 , 339-356 (2003).

- 102 . Lande, R. et al. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells sense selfDNA coupled with antimicrobial peptide. Nature 449 , 564-569 (2007).
- 103 . Kindrachuk, J. et al. A novel vaccine adjuvant comprised of a synthetic innate defence regulator peptide and CpG oligonucleotide links innate and adaptive immunity. Vaccine 27 , 4662-4671 (2009).
- 104 . Martineau, A. R. et al. High-dose vitamin D3 during intensive-phase antimicrobial treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis: a double-blind randomised controlled trial. Lancet 377 , 242-250 (2011).
- 105 . Liu, P . T . et al. T oll-like receptor triggering of a vitamin D-mediated human antimicrobial response. Science 311 , 1770-1773 (2006). A study linking vitamin D deficiency to impaired immune defences against tuberculosis in the human population.
- 106 . Raqib, R. et al. Improved outcome in shigellosis associated with butyrate induction of an endogenous peptide antibiotic. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103 , 9178-9183 (2006).
- 107 .  Medzhitov, R. Recognition of microorganisms and activation of the immune response. Nature 449 , 819-826 (2007).
- 108 . Kumar, H., Kawai, T . &amp; Akira, S. Pathogen recognition by the innate immune system. Int. Rev. Immunol. 30 , 16-34 (2009).
- 109 . Lambrecht, B. N., Kool, M., Willart, M. A. &amp; Hammad, H. Mechanism of action of clinically approved adjuvants. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 21 , 23-29 (2009).
- 110 .  Nicholls, E. F ., Madera, L. &amp; Hancock, R. E. Immunomodulators as adjuvants for vaccines and antimicrobial therapy. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 1213 , 46-61 (2011).
- 111 .  Round, J. L. &amp; Mazmanian, S. K. The gut microbiota shapes intestinal immune responses during health and disease. Nature Rev. Immunol. 9 , 313-323 (2009).
- 112 .  Willing, B. P ., Russell, S. L. &amp; Finlay, B. B. Shifting the balance: antibiotic effects on host-microbiota mutualism. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 9 , 233-243 (2011).
- 113 .  Lebeer, S., Vanderleyden, J. &amp; De Keersmaecker, S. C. Host interactions of probiotic bacterial surface molecules: comparison with commensals and pathogens. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 8 , 171-184 (2010).

Three reviews (references 111-113) that cover the recent developments in our understanding of the host interactions with the gut microbiota and the roles of these interactions in health and disease.

- 114 .  Schlee, M. et al. Probiotic lactobacilli and VSL#3 induce enterocyte β -defensin 2. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 151 , 528-535 (2008).
- 115 .  Schlee, M. et al. Induction of human β -defensin 2 by the probiotic Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 is mediated through flagellin. Infect. Immun. 75 , 2399-2407 (2007).

- 116 .  Cosseau, C. et al. The commensal Streptococcus salivarius K12 downregulates the innate immune responses of human epithelial cells and promotes host-microbe homeostasis. Infect. Immun. 76 , 4163-4175 (2008).
- 117 .  Hafez, M. et al. The K5 capsule of Escherichia coli strain Nissle 1917 is important in mediating interactions with intestinal epithelial cells and chemokine induction. Infect. Immun. 77 , 2995-3003 (2009).
- 118 .  Senok, A. C., Verstraelen, H., T emmerman, M. &amp; Botta, G. A. Probiotics for the treatment of bacterial vaginosis. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 4 , CD006289 (2009).
- 119 .  T wetman, S. &amp; Stecksen-Blicks, C. Probiotics and oral health effects in children. Int. J. Paediatr. Dent. 18 , 3-10 (2008).
- 120 . Wells, J. M. &amp; Mercenier, A. Mucosal delivery of therapeutic and prophylactic molecules using lactic acid bacteria. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 6 , 349-362 (2008).
- 121 . Gaspari, A., T yring, S. K. &amp; Rosen, T . Beyond a decade of 5% imiquimod topical therapy. J. Drugs Dermatol. 8 , 467-474 (2009).
- A recent summary of the applications of the TLR7 agonist imiquimod, one of the most widely used TLR agonists in the clinic.
- 122 . Harper, D. M. et al. Sustained efficacy up to 4.5 years of a bivalent L1 virus-like particle vaccine against human papillomavirus types 16 and 18: follow-up from a randomised control trial. Lancet 367 , 1247-1255 (2006).
- A report detailing the successful clinical trials of a human papilloma virus vaccine that uses an adjuvant formulation, including the TLR4 agonist MPL.
- 123 . Dubensky, T. W. Jr &amp; Reed, S. G. Adjuvants for cancer vaccines. Semin. Immunol. 22 , 155-161 (2010).

## Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) for their research on immunomodulators. R.E.W.H. holds a Canada Research Chair. A.N. was a recipient of postdoctoral fellowships from the CIHR and the Michael Smith Foundation. D.J.P. is a Howard Hughes International Research Scholar.

## Competing interests statement

The authors declare competing financial interests; see web version for details.

## FURTHER INFORMATION

Robert E. W. Hancock's homepage:

http://www.cmdr.ubc.ca/bobh

Dana J. Philpott's homepage: http://www.immunology.

utoronto.ca/faculty/directory/philpott.htm

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF