## Human neutrophils secrete vascular endothelial growth factor

Norton S. TaichmanGLYPH&lt;1&gt; Sylvia Young,t Alan T. Cruchley,t Peter Taylor,t and Ewa Paleologt

* Univeizity of Pennsylvania, School of Dental Medicine, Department of Pathology, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; tKennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Hammersmith., London W6 8L United Kingdom; and GLYPH&lt;1&gt;St. Banholomewc and the Royal London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Department of Oral Pathology, London El 2AD, United Kingdom

Abstract: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a multifunctional cytokine that plays a pivotal role in mediating neovascularization as well as other endothelial cell alterations during inflammation. In this study, we demonstrate that human neutrophils are a source of VEGF. We observed that isolated blood neutrophils released VEGF in response to different stimuli and we demonstrated by immunohistochemistry that neutrophils infiltrating inflamed tissues contain VEGF. These results indicate that neutrophil-derived VEGF may be instrumental in regulating vascular responses during acute and chronic inflammation. J. Leukoc. Biol. 62: 397-400; 1997.

Key Words: inflammation. angiogenesis. VEGF

Neutrophils produce numerous vasoactive substances that induce a variety of reversible as well as irreversible alterations in endothelial cell functions [1-3J. The possibility that neutrophils may produce angiogenic factors has, however, received relatively little attention. In this context, neutrophilderived elastase and other proteinases appear to indirectly influence inflammatory angiogenesis. By degrading vascular basement membranes and other subendothelial matrix components, these enzymes may facilitate endothelial cell migration into wounds 14, 5J. Here we document that activated human neutrophils may directly modulate endothelial cell proliferation by secreting vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF, also referred to as vascular permeability factor, or VPF). VEGF is a potent and specific endothelial cell mitogen that is active in vitro and in vivo, and has been implicated in several angiogenesis-dependent processes such as tumorigenesis, inflammation, and wound healing [reviews: 6-81. Although VEGF is expressed by a range of cell types, including fibroblasts 191, keratinocytes 1101, and macrophages [11GLYPH&lt;1&gt;, there are no reports of VEGF being secreted by neutrophils.

Human neutrophils were isolated from citrated venous blood (93 mM sodium citrate, 7 mM citric acid, and 233 mM glucose; 1 vol anticoagulant/9 vol blood) obtained from healthy volunteers (male/female; 33-60 years of age). The protocol entailed sequential sedimentation of the cells in 3% dextran (T500, Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO), followed by Lymphoprep (Nycomed, Norway) density centrifugation and hypotonic lysis of contaminating erythro-

cytes. The final cell preparation, consisting of &gt;95% viable neutrophils (as determined by toluidine blue staining), was suspended in RPM! 1640 containing 5% fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 mglmL), and fungizone (2.5 mg/mL).

VEGF release was studied in cells (5 x 106 neutrophils in a total of 500 GLYPH&lt;1&gt;.tL RPM! 1640) placed into capped polypropylene tubes (Falcon, U.K.) and incubated at 37#{176}C for 5-120 mm in a water bath shaker. Neutrophils were exposed to ionomycin (Calbiochem-Novabiochem, CA; final concentration 0.1-10.0 GLYPH&lt;1&gt;.tg/mL), phorbol dibutyrate (Sigma; 0.1-10.0 p.tg/mL), or serum-opsonized zymosan particles (Sigma; zymosan was preincubated in fresh autologous donor serum (5 mg zymosan/mL serum) for 30 mm at 37#{176}C,followed by washing in distilled water). All reagents were diluted in RPM! 1640. Controls included cells suspended in medium alone or exposed to dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in amounts equivalent to solubilize ionomycin or phorbol dibutyrate. Finally, cells were sedimented (350 g) and culture supernates were assayed for secreted VEGF by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The total amount of VEGF available was determined by assaying freeze/thaw cell extracts.

The VEGF ELISA was carried out in 96-well microtiter plates (!mmunoplate, Maxisorp, Nunc, U.K.) coated overnight at 4#{176}Cith w 100 j.tL monoclonal antibody against recombinant human (rh) VEGF16S (R&amp;D Systems, Oxford, England; 1 mg/mL in 50 mM carbonate buffer, pH 9.6) and then washed six times with 0.01% Tween 20 in phosphatebuffered saline (PBS; washing was performed in the same manner between each subsequent step). After blocking (120 mm, 37#{176}C) with bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma; 2% in PBS), 100 i.tL culture supernates and rh VEGF standards (R&amp;D Systems; 19.5-2000 pglmL diluted in RPMI 1640) were added to the wells and incubated overnight at 4#{176}C. Subsequently, 100 GLYPH&lt;1&gt;.tL rabbit IgG against human

Fig. 1. VECF release from human neutrophils exposed to ionomycin. Neutrophils were exposed in triplicate to varying concentrations of ionomycin for 5-30 mm. At the conclusion, VEGF in the culture medium was measured by ELISA. Controls consisted of cells in medium alone or incubated with DMSO (in concentrations equivalent to solubilize ionomycin); VEGF release under these circumstances was not above background (not illustrated). Numbers in parentheses represent percent of total VEGF released from neutrophils (as determined in freeze/thaw lysates). The results (mean -SD) are from a representative experiment (n 4).

<!-- image -->

1 mg/mL leupeptin. After centrifugation, VEGF in the supernates was immunoprecipitated (3 h, 4#{176}C) in the presence of polyclonal rabbit anti-human VEGF (20 mg/mL; AMS Biotechnology) and bound to protein G sepharose (Pharmacia Biotech, U.K.). After washing in lysis buffer, the complex was added to sample buffer (125 mM TrisHC1, pH 6.8, 8% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 40% glycerol) and boiled for 5 mm. The supernatants containing 25-30 ng total protein were subjected to 12.5% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. !mmunoprecipitates were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, which were then blocked with 5% milk powder-PBS and incubated overnight at 4#{176}C with 0.5 mg/mL monoclonal mouse anti-human VEGF (R&amp;D Systems). The membrane was stained with sheep anti-mouse Ig (Fab'2) horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibody (1:4000) (Amersham, U.K.) and developed with the ECL immunodetection system (Amersham).

VEGF (AMS Biotechnology, U.K.; 0.5 mg/mL in 2% BSAPBS) was added (120 mm, room temp.), followed by 100 GLYPH&lt;1&gt;.tL peroxidase-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (Eurogenetics, U.K.; 0.1 mg/mL in 2% BSA-PBS) (60 mm, room temp.). Substrate solution (100 GLYPH&lt;1&gt;.tL/well; TMB, Dynatech, U.K.) was added (10 mm) and the reaction was terminated with 100 p.tL 4.5 N H2SO4. Absorbance was recorded at 450 nm.

In vitro exposure of neutrophils to ionomycin, phorbol dibutyrate, or zymosan activated extracellular secretion of VEGF (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). The magnitude of the response varied with the stimulant applied and was time and dose dependent. By contrast, less than 10% of the total available VEGF was secreted from cells in medium without stimulants or incubated with DMSO (Fig. 1, Fig. 2).

Western blots were used to detect VEGF isoforms in isolated human neutrophils secured from three donors (Fig. 3). VEGF consists of four different molecular species (VEGF121, VEGF16S, VEGF189, and VEGF206) produced by alternative splicing of mRNA 16-81. All VEGF isoforms bind selectively to high-affinity receptors found almost exclusively on the cell membrane of endothelial cells 112, 131. Briefly, 70-100 million cells were disrupted in lysis buffer: 0.5% Triton-X 100, 200 mM NaC1, 50 mM TrisHC1 (pH 8.0), 10% glycerol, 0.1 M ethylenediaminetetraacetate, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 3 mg/mL aprotinin, 2.5 mg/mL pepstatin,

VEGF was identified by immunohistochemical staining of neutrophils in a variety of human inflammatory lesions, including synovial biopsies from rheumatoid arthritis, penapical dental granulomas, chronically inflamed gingival tissues, mucus extravasation phenomenon (mucocele), and nonspecific oral ulceration. Briefly, formalin-fixed, deparaffinized sections (5 J.tm thickness) were pretreated with protease XXIV (1 mg/mL in PBS; 90 s; BioGenex, San Ramon, CA) and incubated overnight with goat anti-rh VEGF165 (2 p.tg/mL; R&amp;D Systems). Sections were then reacted with biotinylated anti-goat IgG (5 GLYPH&lt;1&gt;.tg/mL; Sigma) and an avidin-biotinylated-alkaline phosphatase conjugate (ABC-AP; Dako, High Wycombe, U.K.), and visualized by using an alkaline phosphatase substrate kit (Vector Red, Vector Laboratories, Peterborough, U.K.). Levamisole (1 mM; Sigma) was added to the substrate to block endogenous a!-

Fig. 2. VEGF release from human neutrophils exposed to opsonized zymosan or to phorbol dibutyrate for 60 or 120 mm, respectively. Controls included cells in medium without stimulants. Results are expressed as percent release of the total VEGF available (measured in freeze/thaw lysates) and are from a representative experiment (n 3).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Western blot analysis of VEGF in neutrophils from three donors. Three protein bands, in the range 30-48 kDa, were detected in all specimens (the high molecular weight band is relatively faint in subject #3). Literature data indicate the existence of at least four isoforms. We suggest that the two lower molecular weight protein bands most probably correspond to VEGFI21 and VEGF165. However, it is unclear whether the highest molecular weight band represents VEGFIS9 or VEGF2O6.

<!-- image -->

kaline phosphatase activity and the sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. All antibodies were diluted in 0.2 M Tris HC1, pH 7.6 containing 5% BSA and 0.5% normal human serum to reduce nonspecific binding; all reactions were carried out for 30 mm at room temp. unless stated otherwise.

In the synovial biopsies, VEGF staining was localized to endothelial cells lining microvascular channels as well as mononuclear cells in adjacent areas of the specimen. In oral inflammatory lesions, VEGF was evident in monocytes/ macrophages, plasma cells, epithelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells. Neutrophils within or emigrating from microvessels as well as those in the connective tissues stained intensely for VEGF (Fig. 4A), although there was evidence that some areas contained VEGF-negative neutrophils. Specificity of VEGF staining was confirmed by preabsorption of the primary antibody with rh VEGF or by substitution of the primary antibody with nonspecific goat IgG (Fig. 4B).

VEGF is a glycosylated homodimer protein that is upregulated in numerous inflammatory lesions such as rheumatoid arthritis [11, 14], delayed hypersensitivity 1151, and healing wounds [10]. In addition to its mitogenic properties, VEGF stimulates other functional changes in endothelial cells, including increased permeability to fluids and plasma proteins (6], endothelial cell migration [14], interstitial collagenase production [16], von Willebrand factor release 1171, and enhanced procoagulant activity [18]. These findings suggest that VEGF may contribute to a spectrum of pathologic alterations in the behavior of endothelial cells during inflammation.

Our experiments demonstrate that neutrophils are a potential source of VEGF in inflamed tissues. As neutrophils adhere onto the vascular surface and leave the bloodstream, they are in a strategic position to influence the proliferative behavior as well as other functions of endothelial cells. If VEGF release occurs during neutrophil transmigration, it would represent an efficient mechanism for delivering VEGF to its cellular target. Neutrophils are conspicuous in acute inflammatory reactions and are also prominent in chronic inflammatory exudates such as rheumatoid arthritis and periodontitis. Although the amount of VEGF secreted by individual neutrophils may be relatively small, the high traffic and turnover of these cells in inflammatory lesions may be sufficient to account for an appreciable contribution of VEGF to the local cytokine pool. Moreover, synergy between VEGF and other cytokines (e.g., basic fibroblast growth factor) enhances the mitogenic effect of VEGF in vitro and may have a similar influence on angiogenesis in vivo [19]. Our results suggest that neutrophil-derived VEGF may be significant to the development and progression of angiogenic and other vascular phenomena in inflammatory processes.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4. (A) Immunohistochemical localization of VEGF in neutrophils infiltrating labial mucosa in mucus extravasation phenomenon (mucocele). Several VEGF-stained neutrophils and monocytes are observed within this dilated venule: VEGF-positive neutrophils are also evident in the connective tissues. Magnification x 300. (B) Control section of mucocele showing no immunostaining of VEGF in neutrophils. Numerous leukocytes are evident in this congested venule, but none is positive for VEGF. In this instance, the primary antibody was incubated with rh VEGF before application to the section, which was subsequently counterstained with hematoxylin. Magnification x300.

<!-- image -->

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

These studies were supported by the Arthritis and Rheumatism Council of Great Britain and the University of Pennsylvania Research Foundation. We wish to thank Dr. William Abrams and Dr. Jeffery Stewart for their critical comments in the preparation of this manuscript.

## REFERENCES

- 1. Liu. J. H., Djeu. J. Y. (1995) Role of cytokines in neutrophil functions. In Human Cytokines: Their Role in Disease and Therapy (B. B. Aggarwal and R. K. Pun. eds.). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Science, 71-86.
- 2. Malech. H. L.. Gallin. J. I. (1987) Neutrophils in human diseases. New EngI. J. Med. 317. 687-694.
- 3. Weiss. S. J. (1989) Tissue destruction by neutrophils. New EngI. J. Med. 320. 365-376.
- 4. Owen. C. A.. Campbell, E. J. (1995) Neutrophil proteinases and matrix degradation. The cell biology of pericellular proteolysis. Semin. Cell Biol. 6, 367-376.
- 5. Weiss, S. J.. Regiani. S. (1984) Neutrophils degrade subendothelial matrices in the presence of alpha 1-proteinase inhibitor: Cooperative use of lysosomal proteinases and oxygen metabolites. J. Clin. Invest. 73. 1297-1303.
- 6. Dvorak, H. F.. Brown, L. F., DetmaiGLYPH&lt;1&gt; M., Dvorak, A. M. (1995) Vascular permeability factor/vascular endothelial growth factor, microvascular permeability and angiogenesis. Am. J. Pathol. 146, 1029-1039.
- 7. Ferrara, N. (1995) The role of vascular endothelial growth factor in pathological angiogenesis. Brea.st Cancer Res. Treat. 36, 127-137.
- 8. Thomas. K. A. (1996) Vascular endothelial growth factor, a potent and selective angiogenic agent. J. Biol. Chem. 271. 603-606.
- 9. Pertovaara. L., Kaipainen, A.. Mustonen, T., Orpana, A., Ferrara, N.. Saksela. 0., Alitalo. K. (1994) Vascular endothelial growth factor is induced in response to transforming growth factor-n in fibroblastic and epithelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 6271-6274.

- 10. Brown, L. F., Yeo, K-T., Berse, B., Yeo, T. K., Senger, D. R., Dvorak, H. F.. Van de Water, L. (1992) Expression of vascular permeability factor (vascular endothelial growth factor) by epidermal keratinocytes during wound healing. J. ExpL Med. 176, 1375-1379.
- 11. Fava, R. A., Olsen, N. J.. Spencer-Green. G.. Yea. K. T., Yeo. T. K.. Berse, B.. Jackman. R. W.. Dvorak. H. F.. Brown, 1. F. (1994) Vascular permeability factor/endothelial growth factor (VPF/VEGF): accumulation and expression in human synovial fluids and rheumatoid synovial tissue. J. ExpGLYPH&lt;1&gt; Med. 180, 341-346.
- 12. Dc Vries, C., Escobedo, J. A., Ueno, H., Houck, K., Ferrara. N., Williams. L. T. (1992) The fms-like tyrosine kinase, a receptor for vascular endothehal growth factor. Science 255. 989-991.
- 13. Quinn, T. P.. Peters, K. G., De Vnies, C., Ferrara. N.. Williams, L. T. (1993) Fetal liver kinase 1 is a receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor and is selectively expressed in vascular endothelium. Proc. Nail. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 7533-7537.
- 14. Koch, A. E., Harlow, L. A., Haines, G. K., Amento, E. P., Unemori, E. N., Wong, W. L., Pope, R. M., Ferrara, N. (1994) Vascular endotheial growth factor. A cytokine modulating endothelial cell function in rheumatoid arthritis. J. Immunol. 152, 4149-4156.
- 15. Brown, L. F.. Olbricht, S. M., Berse, B., Jackman, R. W.. Matsueda. G., Tognazzi. K., Manseau, E. J., Dvorak, H. F., Van de Water, L. (1995) Overexpression of vascular permeability factor (VPFIVEGF) and its endotheial cell receptors in delayed hypersensitivity skin reactions. J. ImmunoL 154. 2801-2807.
- 16. Unemori, E. N., Ferrara, N., Bauer, E. A., Amento, E. P. (1992) Vascular endothelial growth factor induces interstitial cohlagenase expression in human endothelial cells. J. Cell PhyGLYPH&lt;1&gt;iol. 153, 557-562.
- 17. Brock, T. A., Dvorak, H. F., Senger. D. R. (1991) Tumor-secreted vascular permeability factor increases cytosolic Ca2GLYPH&lt;1&gt; and von Wiliebrand factor release in human endotheial cells. Am. J. Pathol. 138, 213-221.
- 18. Clauss, M., Gerlach, M., Gerlach. H.. Brett. J.. Wang. E. Familletti, P. C.. Ran, Y. C., Olander, J. V.. Connolly, D. T.. Stern. D. (1990) Vascular permeability factor: a tumor-derived polypeptide that induces endotheial cell and monocyte procoagulant activity, and promotes monocyte migration. J. Exp Med. 172, 1535-1545.
- 19. Pepper, M. S.. Ferrara, N.. Orci. L.. Montesano. R. (1992) Potent synergism between vascular endothelial growth factor and basic fibroblast growth factor in the induction of angiogenesis in vitro. Biochem. BiophyGLYPH&lt;1&gt;. Res. Commun. 189, 824-831.