## REVIEW

## Pre- and postconditioning the heart with hydrogen sulfide   (H S) 2 against ischemia/reperfusion injury in vivo: a systematic review and meta-analysis

Qutuba G. Karwi 1,2 · Justin S. Bice 1 · Gary F. Baxter 1

Received: 7 September 2017 / Accepted: 8 December 2017 / Published online: 14 December 2017 © The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication

## Abstract

Conditioning-like infarct limitation by enhanced level of hydrogen sulfide   (H S) has been demonstrated in many animal 2 models of myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury (MIRI) in vivo. We sought to evaluate the effect of   H S on myocardial 2 infarction across in vivo pre-clinical studies of MIRI using a comprehensive systematic review followed by meta-analysis. Embase, Pubmed and Web of Science were searched for pre-clinical investigation of the effect of   H S on MIRI in vivo. 2 Retained records (6031) were subjected to our pre-defined inclusion criteria then were objectively critiqued. Thirty-two reports were considered eligible to be included in this study and were grouped, based on the time of   H S application, into 2 preconditioning and postconditioning groups. Data were pooled using random effect meta-analysis. We also investigated the possible impact of different experimental variables and the risk of bias on the observed effect size. Preconditioning with H2S ( n = 23) caused a significant infarct limitation of - 20.25% (95% CI - 25.02, - 15.47). Similarly, postconditioning with   H 2 S ( n = 40) also limited infarct size by - 21.61% (95% CI - 24.17, - 19.05). This cardioprotection was also robust and consistent following sensitivity analyses where none of the pre-defined experimental variables had a significant effect on the observed infarct limitation.   H S shows a significant infarct limitation across in vivo pre-clinical studies of MIRI which 2 include data from 825 animals. This infarct-sparing effect is robust and consistent when   H S is applied before ischemia or 2 at reperfusion, independently on animal size or sulfide source. Validating this infarct limitation using large animals from standard medical therapy background and with co-morbidities should be the way forward.

Keywords Preconditioning · Postconditioning · Hydrogen sulfide · Ischemia/reperfusion · Systematic review · Metaanalysis

## Introduction

Re-establishing coronary blood flow by either mechanical (primary percutaneous coronary intervention) and/ or pharmacological (thrombolytic agents) treatment is

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s00395-017-0664-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

- * Qutuba G. Karwi karwiqg@cardiff.ac.uk
- 1 School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Cardiff University, Redwood Building, King Edward VII Avenue, Cardiff CF10 3NB, UK
- 2 Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Diyala, Diyala, Iraq

essential to limit myocardial damage following acute myocardial ischemia. In industrialised countries, there has been a significant improvement in surgical practice and standard care with an estimate of only one out of four patients with acute ischemic heart attack admitted to  early  reperfusion  intervention  dying  [41].  Despite this improvement in the survival rate following heart attack, there has also been a considerable increase in long-term co-morbidity and mortality in those patients, which is often a function of the primary infarction. This emphasises the urgent need for treatments which have a therapeutic value for patients with ischemic heart disease. Although an enormous number of mechanical and pharmacological interventions have reported promising infarct-limiting effects experimentally, none has successfully been clinically translated since the first experimental evidence of infarct limitation by ischemic conditioning

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

was reported by Murry et al. [43]. The reasons behind this failure have been discussed in a number of recent reviews and position papers [18, 20, 23] which emphasised three main issues regarding pre-clinical studies. First, there is a 'disconnection' between the preclinical and the clinical studies. The complexity of the clinical situation for ischemic heart disease patients needs to be reflected in pre-clinical investigations. This includes common comorbidities and co-medications which most patients have and are known to modify the response to many cardioprotective manoeuvres experimentally [22, 25]. Second, poor reporting of pre-clinical study methodology and protocols could potentially lead to unnecessary clinical trials [2, 22]. Third, there has been a growing emphasis on interrogating the literature and the careful examination for the pre-clinical evidence using comprehensive, unbiased approaches before conducting any clinical trial [7, 21, 22].

In 1989, hydrogen sulfide   (H S) was first detected in 2 rat brain [61], after long being recognised as a toxic gas. It is now recognised as one of the gasotransmitters family along with nitric oxide (NO) and carbon monoxide (CO). There is an increasing body of evidence demonstrating an essential role of   H 2 S in health and disease [60]. Experimentally, enhanced levels of   H S have been 2 shown to elicit infarct-limiting effect against myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury (MIRI) in mouse [31], rat [33], rabbit [38] and pig [45]. Promisingly, SG1002, a novel   H 2 S prodrug, has recently successfully completed a phase I clinical trial showing a promising margin of safety in failing heart patients [48]. The cardioprotective mechanism(s) by which   H S induces its cardiopro2 tection are not fully understood. However, there is general consensus that it is mainly through either activating the reperfusion injury salvage kinase (RISK) pathway, promoting endogenous antioxidant capacity or preserving mitochondrial integrity [5, 14]. Different approaches have been used to enhance   H S level in vivo with either 2 conventional inorganic sulfide salts, organic   H S donors 2 or phosphodiesterase inhibitors, which we are going to collectively term 'H S boosters' in this analysis. These 2 approaches have been shown to limit various markers of MIRI ex vivo and in vivo.

We conducted a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the effect of   H S on acute 2 myocardial infarction across the in vivo MIRI preclinical studies. In addition, we also performed an additional analysis to provide further insights into the external validity and how the observed infarct limitation by   H S could 2 be influenced by different experimental models or pharmacological approaches. Furthermore, we investigated internal validity of our finding and how reporting quality of included studies and publication bias could have an

<!-- image -->

impact on the results and the general conclusion of our study.

## Methodology

## Systematic review and data collection

The systematic review was conducted according to the preferred reporting items for systematic review and metaanalysis (PRISMA) guideline [40]. JSB and QGK performed the literature search of the electronic databases Embase, Medline and Web of Science using selected keywords and MeSH terms where appropriately specific to each database (see the supplementary material).

## Inclusion/exclusion criteria

The search included the literature that investigated the effect of   H 2 S on infarct size in in vivo models of MIRI, published between January 01, 2005 and December 16, 2016 considering that the first in vivo report was published in 2006 by Sivarajah et al. [55]. The search only included studies which are available in English. Publications were independently retrieved from the electronic literature and checked for duplication (Fig. 1). The search results were then subjected to the inclusion criteria (Table 1a). Inclusion criteria were developed in accordance with PICOS approach [44]. Reports were included if they characterised the effect of a   H 2 S booster (pre- and/or post-ischemia) versus vehicle or no treatment on the infarct size following MIRI in vivo. Studies were excluded at this stage if there was no documented reperfusion phase or if the coronary artery occlusion was permanent. Reports were also excluded where   H S treatment was continued throughout 2 ischemia/reperfusion protocol, throughout reperfusion phase, or given more than 10 min after the commencement of reperfusion. In vitro or ex vivo studies were also excluded. Disagreements between the primary reviewers were resolved by secondary reviewer (GFB). Studies employing genetically modified animals or animals with co-morbidity, such as diabetes, heart failure, or high blood pressure, were excluded. Experimental studies where an H2S booster was concomitantly administered with other pharmacological treatment, whether it is known for its cardioprotective properties or not, were also not included.

Fig. 1 PRISMA diagram of systematic review and data selection at different stages

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Lists of (a) inclusion criteria and (b) critical appraisal tool

- (a) Inclusion criteria
- 1. In vivo investigation
- 2. Documented duration of ischemia and reperfusion
- 3. Documented time and dose of the exogenous   H S booster(s) 2
- 4. Infarct size determined by a recognised method
- (b) Critical appraisal checklist
- 1. Characteristics of the animal model (age/weight/sex)
- 2. Whether the animals were randomly assigned for the control or the treatment group
- 3. Details about the   H S enhancer used including its name, source, dose, route of administration and the time of intervention 2
- 4. Whether the experimental protocol is clearly reported including the duration of ischemia and reperfusion and the end point of interest
- 5. Infarct size determination is clearly detailed
- 6. Evaluation of the study design including group size and the statistical power
- 7. Whether a blind-approach of analysis was adopted by the experimentalist at any stage to carry out the measurements and/or to analyse the data
- 8. Whether the data were statistically analysed using an appropriate test
- 9. Whether data interpretation was precise and supports the study conclusion
- 10. Whether study limitations and/or conflicts of interest were clearly documented

## Critical appraisal

The quality and rigour of studies were examined using the critical appraisal tool (Table 1b) which allowed unbiased,

comprehensive  evaluation  of  the  studies  at  full-text level. Corresponding authors were contacted by email to enquire about missing information. Thirty-five papers were

considered to meet the inclusion criteria and passed critical appraisal to be included in this study (Fig. 1).

## Data extraction and statistical analysis

Our primary outcome was the weighted (unstandardised) mean difference (WMD) in infarct size (IS %) between the experimental group   (H S-treated group) and the control 2 group. We identified 65 independent comparisons in the 35 included articles (Table 2). The number of animals in the control group was corrected based on the number of comparisons for each series of experiments ( n /number of comparisons) [59]. We also identified two experimental variables, namely the animal model size and source of   H S, as 2 a secondary outcome which might influence the effect size and heterogeneity.

Comparisons were divided into two main groups: preconditioning group (pre-H S), where   H S booster was given 2 2 any time before the onset of ischemia, and postconditioning group (post-H S), where   H S booster was administrated dur2 2 ing regional ischemia or at the commencement of reperfusion. The rationale for grouping the comparisons according to the time of intervention was due to the fact that these two windows of intervention arguably have different clinical applications. For instance, pre-H S could be applied when 2 the onset of ischemia is predictable (planned surgery), while post-H 2 S could be used as adjunctive therapy with reperfusion in STEMI patients.

## Meta-analysis

For each independent comparison, the raw effect size (as a primary outcome) was calculated by subtracting the mean infarct size of the experimental group from the infarct size of the control group along with its correspondent 95% confidence interval (95% CI). We pooled raw effect sizes in each main group using random effect meta-analysis which takes into consideration between-comparison- and within-comparison variations and weights each comparison accordingly. Heterogeneity across different experimental protocols and models, within each main group, was quantified using I 2 statistics [27, 59]. All analyses were carried out using Review Manager (RevMan 5.3.5 Copenhagen, Denmark: The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2014).

## Sensitivity analysis

We also carried out subgroup analyses using univariate meta-regression based on pre-defined experimental factors (as a secondary outcome) which might potentially have an impact on the observed effect size of   H S and heteroge2 neity. The percentage of between-comparison variability explained by the variable of interest was evaluated by I 2 and

<!-- image -->

adjusted R 2 statistics. The level of significance was adjusted to account for multiple comparisons using the Holm-Bonferroni method [26]. Furthermore, we also tested the robustness of our findings by conducting an additional stratified meta-analysis using standardised mean difference (SMD). SMD represented the mean difference in infarct size between control and   H S-treated groups divided by the pooled stand2 ard deviation of the mean.

## Risk of bias

We also characterised the quality of study reporting for included studies using a predefined 20-point scoring scale based on the ARRIVE guidelines [34]. This was carried out by JSB and GFB independently and aimed to evaluate the rigour and transparency of included reports. Publication bias, in terms of effect size and degree of precision, was also evaluated independently by QGK and GFB by visual inspection of funnel plot of mean difference (MD) vs standard error of the mean (SD) for all included studies.

## Results

## Study selection process

Our initial search of the databases identified 8969 records (Fig. 1); 2938 duplicates were removed at this stage. 6031 reports were screened independently by QGK and JSB at the title level to check for relevancy to our study scope. 459 reports were considered relevant and screened at the abstract level to investigate if they met the inclusion criteria. As a result, 135 papers passed to the full-text review along with two studies which were identified through 'snow-balling' at this stage. These articles were independently critiqued by JSB and QGK using our pre-defined, comprehensive critical appraisal tool. Finally, 32 papers were included in our analysis (Table 2), from which we included 58 controlled comparisons. We then divided the comparisons based on the time of intervention into pre-H S (23 comparisons) and 2 post-H 2 S (35 comparisons) groups.

## Meta-analysis

Preconditioning the heart using   H S boosters in vivo caused 2 a significant limitation in infarct size of - 20.25% (95% CI - 25.02, - 15.47; Fig. 2) compared to control ( p &lt; 0.001, n = 23 comparisons). This meta-analysis included data from 116 control animals and 197 animals that received   H S 2 boosters before ischemia. This overall effect size was accompanied by a high degree of heterogeneity measured using I 2 (91%, p &lt; 0.001). In the post-H S group,   H S also caused a 2 2

Table 2 Summary of the main characteristics of included pre-clinical studies

| 20.1 4.3                                                          | 15.5 1.1                                                         | 26 3                                          |                                        | 18.2 3.3                                                           | 1.8                                                       | 1.4 14.4 1.2                                                            | 16.5                                                             | 2.3                                                | 25.3 6.4                                                                    | 3.9                                                 |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                   |                                                                  |                                               |                                        |                                                                    | 17.8                                                      | 19.5                                                                    |                                                                  |                                                    | 18                                                                          | 18 26.8                                             |
| 4.7 6                                                             | 8                                                                | 10                                            |                                        | 7                                                                  | 8                                                         | 8                                                                       | 8                                                                | 8                                                  | 18                                                                          |                                                     |
|                                                                   | 2.6                                                              |                                               | 3                                      | 2                                                                  | 3.3                                                       | 3.3                                                                     | 3.3                                                              | 3.3                                                | 8.6                                                                         | 8.6                                                 |
| 52.7                                                              | 42.2                                                             |                                               | 48                                     | 25                                                                 | 37.8                                                      | 37.8                                                                    | 37.8                                                             | 37.8                                               | 41.3                                                                        | 41.3                                                |
| 6                                                                 | 8                                                                | 9                                             |                                        | 9                                                                  | 8                                                         | 8                                                                       | 8                                                                | 8                                                  |                                                                             | 18                                                  |
| SEM                                                               | SEM                                                              |                                               | SEM                                    |                                                                    |                                                           |                                                                         |                                                                  | SEM                                                | STD                                                                         |                                                     |
|                                                                   |                                                                  | zine + atropine                               |                                        | SEM                                                                | SEM                                                       | SEM                                                                     | SEM                                                              |                                                    |                                                                             | STD                                                 |
|                                                                   | zine + atropine                                                  | mine + pento-                                 |                                        |                                                                    |                                                           |                                                                         | mine + xyla-                                                     |                                                    |                                                                             |                                                     |
| mine + xyla-                                                      | Keta- mine + xyla-                                               |                                               | barbital                               | mine + pento- barbital                                             | mine + xyla-                                              | mine + xyla-                                                            |                                                                  | zine mine + xyla-                                  | zine Keta- mine + pento- barbital                                           | Keta- mine + pento- barbital                        |
| Keta-                                                             | NR                                                               | Keta-                                         |                                        | Keta-                                                              | Keta-                                                     | zine Keta-                                                              | zine Keta-                                                       | Keta-                                              | R                                                                           |                                                     |
| NR                                                                |                                                                  | R                                             |                                        | R                                                                  | NR                                                        | NR                                                                      | NR                                                               | NR                                                 | 24                                                                          | R                                                   |
| 2                                                                 | 2                                                                | 24                                            |                                        | 25                                                                 | 2                                                         | 2                                                                       | 2                                                                |                                                    |                                                                             | 24                                                  |
| 13-15 weeks NaHS Post (100 µg/kg) as a  bolus 10 min  i.v. 30 LAD | before reperfu- sion Post (100 µg/kg) as a  bolus 10 min  30 LAD | before reperfu- sion Pre (100 µg/kg)  i.v. 45 | as a bolus  24 h before  ischemia i.v. | Pre (100 µg/kg)  as a bolus  24 h before  ischemia LCA i.v. 30 LAD | Post (1 µmol/kg) as a  bolus 10 min  before reperfu- sion | Post (26.6 µmol/ kg) as a bolus  10 min before  reperfusion i.v. 30 LAD | Post (4 µmol/kg) as a  bolus 10 min  before reperfu- i.v. 30 LAD | sion Post (250 nmol/kg) as  a bolus 10 min  i.v. 2 | before reperfu- sion Post 6X109/(kg.h)  with ultra- sonication  i.v. 30 LCA | (100 µg/kg)  as a bolus at  reperfusion i.v. 30 LCA |
| M                                                                 | NaHS                                                             | i.v. Na2S                                     | LCA Na2S                               |                                                                    | Na2S                                                      | GYY4137                                                                 | Thiovalin                                                        | AP39 30n LAD                                       | hs-MB                                                                       | Na2S Post                                           |
|                                                                   | 12-15 weeks                                                      | 8-10 weeks                                    | 8-10 weeks                             | 45                                                                 |                                                           | 8-12 weeks                                                              | 8-12 weeks                                                       | 8-12 weeks                                         | 250-300 g                                                                   | 250-300 g                                           |
|                                                                   |                                                                  | M                                             | M                                      | Mouse M                                                            |                                                           | Mouse M                                                                 | M                                                                |                                                    | M                                                                           | M                                                   |
| Mouse                                                             | Mouse                                                            | Mouse                                         |                                        |                                                                    |                                                           |                                                                         |                                                                  | Mouse                                              |                                                                             |                                                     |
|                                                                   | M and F                                                          |                                               |                                        | 8-12 weeks                                                         |                                                           |                                                                         | Mouse                                                            | M                                                  |                                                                             |                                                     |
| Bibli et al. [3] a                                                |                                                                  |                                               |                                        | [9] b                                                              | Chatzianastasiou  et al. [10] a                           |                                                                         |                                                                  | Chatzianastasiou  et al. [10] d                    |                                                                             |                                                     |
|                                                                   |                                                                  |                                               |                                        | Mouse                                                              |                                                           |                                                                         |                                                                  |                                                    | Rat                                                                         | Rat                                                 |
|                                                                   | Bibli et al. [3] b                                               | Calvert et al.  [9] a                         | Calvert et al.                         |                                                                    | Chatzianastasiou                                          | et al. [10] b                                                           | Chatzianastasiou  et al. [10] c                                  |                                                    | Chen et al.  [11] a                                                         | Chen et al.  [11] b                                 |

| 20    | 14.1 1.4                                 | 3.7                                  | 0.8                              | 1.4                             | 4.5                                           | 7.0                      | 5.5                                      | 2.6                              | 3.5                             | 3.5                              | 4.0                             | 4.0                            | 6.0                                       |
|-------|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| 18 19 | 6                                        | 33.6                                 | 12.5                             | 13.4                            | 29.5                                          | 27.5                     | 27.5                                     |                                  | 20.5                            | 19                               | 34.0                            | 40.0                           | 22.5                                      |
| 17    | 2.2                                      | 9                                    | 4                                | 8                               | 8                                             | 16                       | 12                                       | 12 17.2                          | 12                              | 12                               | 10                              | 10                             | 5                                         |
|       |                                          | 4.5                                  | 1                                | 2.9                             | 4.2                                           | 7.0                      | 1.8                                      | 1.8                              | 3                               | 3                                | 4.0                             | 3.0                            | 5.5                                       |
| 16    | 37.5                                     | 47.6                                 | 45                               | 47.9                            | 58.3                                          | 43.0                     | 48                                       | 48                               | 45.5                            | 45.5                             | 49.5                            | 44.0                           | 35.0                                      |
| 15    | 6                                        | 12                                   | 4                                | 13                              | 8                                             | 16                       | 12                                       | 12                               | 12                              | 12                               | 11                              | 10                             | 5                                         |
| 14    | SEM                                      | SEM                                  | SEM                              | SEM                             |                                               |                          |                                          |                                  | SEM                             |                                  |                                 |                                | SEM                                       |
|       | Pentobarbital  sodium                    | mine + pento- barbital               | Pentobarbital                    | Pentobarbi-                     | tal + ketamine Pentobarbi- tal + ketamine SEM | Urethane SEM             | mine + pento- barbital SEM               | mine + pento- SEM                | barbital mine + pento-          | barbital mine + pento- SEM       | barbital mine + pento- SEM      | barbital mine + pento- SEM     | barbital Chloral hydrate                  |
| 11    | 24                                       | 24                                   | 24                               | 24                              | 72                                            | 2                        | 24                                       | 24                               | 24                              | 24                               | 24                              | 24                             | 2                                         |
| 10    | LCA                                      | LCA                                  | LCA                              | LCA                             | LCA                                           | LCA                      | LCA                                      | LCA                              | LCA                             | LCA                              | LCA                             | LCA                            | LAD                                       |
| 9     | 30                                       | 45                                   | 30                               | 30                              | 45                                            | 30                       | 45                                       | 45                               | 45                              | 45                               | 45                              | 45                             | 30                                        |
| 8     | i.v.                                     | PO                                   | i.p.                             | i.v.                            | i.v.                                          | i.v.                     | i.v.                                     | i.v.                             | i.v.                            | i.v.                             | i.v.                            | i.v.                           | i.p.                                      |
| 6 7   | Pre (1.5*109 pfu)  96 h before  ischemia | Pre (10 mg/kg)  8 h before  ischemia | Pre (100 g/ kg) before  ischemia | Post (50 µg/kg) at  reperfusion | Post (50 µg/kg) at  reperfusion               | Pre (1 µmol/ kg) given   | ischemia Post (50 µg/kg) at  reperfusion | Post (100 µg/kg) at  reperfusion | Post (50 µg/kg) at  reperfusion | Post (100 µg/kg) at  reperfusion | Post (50 mg/kg) at  reperfusion | Post (1 mg/kg) at  reperfusion | Pre (30 µmol/kg)  30 min before  ischemia |
| 5     | Ad.PKGIα                                 | 10-14 weeks Zofenopril               | 32.2 ± 0.4 g Na2S                | Na2S                            | Na2S                                          | SO2    NaHSO3 + Na2 SO 3 | JK-1                                     | JK-1                             | 10-12 weeks JK-2                | JK-2                             | GYY4137                         | DDT-2                          | NaHS                                      |
| 3 4   | M 30-34 g                                | Mouse M                              | M                                | M 8 weeks                       | M 8 weeks                                     | M 250-300 g (            | M 10-12 weeks                            | M 10-12 weeks                    | M                               | M 10-12 weeks                    | M 10-12 weeks                   | M 10-12 weeks                  | M 250-300 g                               |
| 2     | Mouse                                    |                                      | Mouse                            | Mouse                           | Mouse                                         | Rat                      | Mouse                                    |                                  |                                 | Mouse                            | Mouse                           |                                |                                           |
|       |                                          |                                      |                                  |                                 |                                               |                          |                                          | Mouse                            | Mouse                           |                                  |                                 | Mouse                          | Rat                                       |
| 1     | Das et al. [12]                          | Donnarumma  et al. [13]              | Durrant et al.  [15]             | Elrod et al.  [17] a            | Elrod et al.  [17] b                          | Jin et al. [29]          | Kang et al.  [31] a                      | Kang et al.  [31] b              | Kang et al.  [31] c             | Kang et al.  [31] d              | Kang et al.  [31] e             | Kang et al. [31] f             | Kang et al. [30]                          |

| 20                      | 3.8                                    | 2.0                                       | 2.5                                    | 3.3                                                   | 2.7                                              | 2.5                                                       | 0.5                          | 2.0                  | 0.7                                                  | 6.5                                 | 2.5                                     | 2.0                                                        |
|-------------------------|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------|------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| 19                      | 27.9                                   | 27.6                                      | 43.3                                   | 32.1                                                  | 30.1                                             | 27.5                                                      | 22.5                         | 20.0                 | 24.9                                                 | 16                                  | 24.5                                    | 18.8                                                       |
| 18                      | 8                                      | 7                                         | 8                                      | 8                                                     | 8                                                | 8                                                         | 8                            | 8                    | 6                                                    | 6                                   | 14                                      | 6                                                          |
|                         |                                        |                                           |                                        |                                                       | 2.1                                              |                                                           |                              |                      |                                                      |                                     |                                         |                                                            |
| 17                      | 4.7                                    | 3.5                                       | 3.9                                    | 3.9                                                   |                                                  | 2.0                                                       | 2.0                          | 2.0                  | 0.7                                                  | 5.3                                 | 3                                       | 3                                                          |
| 16                      | 52.5                                   | 56.8                                      | 52.8                                   | 52.8                                                  | 53                                               | 34.8                                                      | 34.8                         | 34.8                 | 47.9                                                 | 42.3                                | 53.8                                    | 53.8                                                       |
| 15                      | 10                                     | 7                                         |                                        | 10                                                    | 11                                               | 8                                                         | 8                            |                      |                                                      |                                     |                                         |                                                            |
|                         |                                        |                                           | 10                                     |                                                       |                                                  |                                                           |                              | 8                    | 6                                                    | 6                                   | 11                                      | 11                                                         |
| 14                      | SEM                                    | SEM                                       | SEM                                    | SEM                                                   |                                                  | SEM                                                       | SEM                          | SEM                  | SEM                                                  | SEM                                 | SEM                                     | SEM                                                        |
|                         |                                        |                                           |                                        |                                                       | SEM                                              |                                                           |                              |                      |                                                      |                                     |                                         |                                                            |
| 11                      | NR Thiobutabarbital                    | LAD 2 NR Thiobutabarbital                 | Thiobutabarbital                       | Thiobutabarbital                                      | Thiobutabarbital                                 | 2                                                         | 30 LAD 2 NR                  | i.v. 2 NR            | 30 4 NR tone                                         | 60 2 NR                             | R                                       | 24 R                                                       |
| 8 9 10                  | (266 µmol/kg) as  a bolus 10 min  i.v. | (266 µmol/kg) as  a bolus 10 min  i.v. 30 | i.v. 30 LAD 2 NR                       | NR                                                    | 30 2 NR                                          | 30 LAD NR                                                 | ischemia (2.8 µmol/kg)  i.v. | (14 µmol/kg)  30 LAD | i.v. LAD                                             | reperfusion i.v. LAD                | reperfusion (200 µg/kg)  i.v. 45 LCA 24 | mine + pento- barbital 45 LCA Keta- mine + pento- barbital |
| 12 13                   | before reperfu- 30 LAD 2               | Post                                      | sion Post (0.1 µmol/kg)  10 min before | reperfusion (1 µmol/kg)  10 min before  i.v. 30 LAD 2 | reperfusion (1 µmol/kg)  10 min before  i.v. LAD | reperfusion (1.4 µmol/kg)  10 min before  i.v. Isoflurane | 10 min before  Isoflurane    | ischemia isoflurane  | ischemia (1.79 µmol/ kg) as a bolus  Sodium thiopen- | (0.2 mg/kg)  as a bolus at  Telazol | Keta-                                   | as a bolus at  22.5 min  before reperfu-                   |
| 6 7                     | GYY4137 Post                           | GYY4137                                   | AP39                                   | AP39 Post                                             | AP39 Post                                        | NaHS Pre                                                  | NaHS Pre                     | NaHS Pre             | 4-OH-TBZ Post                                        | Na2S Post                           | DATS Post                               | reperfusion Post (200 µg/kg)  i.p.                         |
| 5                       |                                        | 300-350 g                                 | 300-350 g                              | 300-350 g                                             | 300-350 g                                        |                                                           |                              |                      | 2.8-3.1 kg                                           | 12 weeks                            | 8-10 weeks                              | 8-10 weeks DATS                                            |
| 3 4                     | 300-350 g                              | M                                         | M                                      |                                                       |                                                  | 200-250 g                                                 | 200-250 g                    | 200-250 g            |                                                      | M                                   | M                                       |                                                            |
|                         | M                                      |                                           |                                        | M                                                     | M                                                | M                                                         | M                            | M                    | M                                                    |                                     |                                         | M                                                          |
| 2                       | Rat                                    | Rat                                       | Rat                                    | Rat                                                   | Rat                                              | Rat                                                       | Rat                          | Rat                  | Rabbit                                               | Pig                                 | Mouse                                   | Mouse                                                      |
|                         |                                        |                                           |                                        |                                                       |                                                  | Li et al. [36] a                                          |                              |                      | Lougiakis et al.                                     |                                     | Predmore et al.                         | Predmore et al.                                            |
| Table 2   (continued) 1 | Karwi et al.  [33] a                   | Karwi et al.  [33] b                      | Karwi et al.  [32] a                   | Karwi et al.  [32] b                                  | Karwi et al.  [32] c                             |                                                           | Li et al. [36] b             | Li et al. [36] c     | [38]                                                 | Osipov et al.  [45]                 |                                         | [49] a [49] b                                              |

1 3

| 20        | 13.2 1.7                    | 2.1                   | 0.9                                  | 2.9                          | 3.9                                 | 3.7                                           | 3.2                         | 1.9                         | 3.0                         | 0.8                       |
|-----------|-----------------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|---------------------------|
| 18 19     | 6                           | 6 18.1                | 6 14.1                               | 22                           | 10.2                                | 16.5                                          | 15.8                        | 44                          | 45.0                        | 27.8                      |
|           |                             |                       |                                      | 6                            | 6                                   | 6                                             | 6                           | 7                           | 8                           | 21                        |
| 17        | 2.5                         | 2.5                   | 0.7                                  | 0.5                          | 5                                   | 1.5                                           | 3.5                         | 3.8                         | 3.0                         | 1.3                       |
| 16        | 40.6                        | 45                    | 37.8                                 | 37.0                         | 45.5                                | 43.0                                          | 46.5                        | 59                          | 58.0                        | 72.5                      |
| 15        | 6                           | 6                     | 6                                    | 6                            | 6                                   | 6                                             | 6                           | 10                          | 12                          | 20                        |
| 14        | SEM                         | SEM                   | SEM                                  |                              |                                     |                                               | SEM                         |                             | SEM                         | SEM                       |
|           |                             |                       |                                      | SEM                          | SEM                                 | SEM                                           |                             | SEM                         |                             |                           |
|           |                             |                       |                                      | Pentobarbital                | Pentobarbital                       | Pentobarbital                                 |                             |                             |                             | Isoflurane                |
| 13        | Pentobarbital               | Pentobarbital         | Pentobarbital                        |                              |                                     |                                               | Pentobarbital               | Thiopentone                 | Thiopentone                 |                           |
| 11        | 24                          | 24                    | 3                                    | 3                            | LAD 24                              | LAD 24                                        | LAD 24                      | LAD 2                       | LAD 2                       | LAD 24                    |
| 9 10      | 30 LAD                      | 30 LAD                | 30 LAD                               | 30 LAD                       | 30                                  | 30                                            | 30                          | 25                          | 25                          | 30                        |
|           |                             | i.v.                  |                                      | i.v.                         | i.p.                                | i.v.                                          |                             |                             |                             |                           |
| 7 8       | (1 mg/kg)  1 h before  i.v. | (1 mg/kg)  1 h before | (1 µg/kg) as a  bolus prior to  i.v. | (10 µg/kg) as a  bolus 5 min | (10 µg/kg)  30 min before  ischemia | (10 µg/kg) as a  bolus 5 min  before reperfu- | (10 g/L) in  drinking  p.o. | (3 mg/kg)  as a bolus  i.p. | (3 mg/kg)  as a bolus  i.v. | (100 ppm)  started  nasal |
| Tadalafil |                             | Tadalafil             | Cinaciguat                           | Cinaciguat                   | Cinaciguat                          | Cinaciguat                                    | Beetroot juice              | NaHS                        | NaHS                        |                           |
| 5         | 32.2 ± 0.4 g                | 32.2 ± 0.4 g          | 2.6-3.2 kg                           |                              |                                     |                                               |                             |                             |                             | H2S gas                   |
| 3 4       | Mouse M                     | Mouse M and F         | Rabbit M                             | M 2.6-3.2 kg                 | M 32.2 ± 0.4 g                      | M 32.2 ± 0.4 g                                | M 28-33 g                   | M 220-300 g                 | M 250-320 g                 | M 6-8 weeks               |
| 2         |                             |                       |                                      | Rabbit                       | Salloum et al.  Mouse               | Salloum et al.  Mouse                         | Mouse                       | Rat                         | Rat                         | Snijder et al.  Mouse     |
|           |                             | Salloum et al.        |                                      |                              |                                     |                                               | Salloum et al.              |                             |                             |                           |
|           | Salloum et al.  [51] a      |                       | Salloum et al.                       | Salloum et al.               |                                     |                                               |                             | Sivarajah et al.            | Sivarajah et al.            |                           |
| 1         |                             | [51] b                | [52] a                               | [52] b                       | [52] c                              | [52] d                                        | [53]                        | []55                        | [54]                        | [56]                      |
|           | 36                          | 37                    |                                      | 39                           | 40                                  | 41                                            | 42                          |                             | 44                          | 45                        |
|           |                             |                       | 38                                   |                              |                                     |                                               |                             | 43                          |                             |                           |

Table 2 (continued)

| 20    | 3.0                                | 1.5                                     | 3.0                                      | 5.8                                 | 4.5                            | 6.0                                          | 4.5                                         | 6.0                       | 5.0                                       | 4.5                        | 5.0                        | 2.0                         | 22.2 5.9                                          | Different letters refer to different studies and experimental groups within each included study (i.e. reference) and have been given according to how these studies or experimental group appear in                               |
|-------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 18 19 | 6 25.0                             | 6 16.3                                  | 36.0                                     | 16.5                                | 6 30.5                         | 28.5                                         | 31.5                                        | 6 55.0                    | 32.5                                      | 25.5                       | 24                         | 12 19.0                     | 8                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 17    | 2.0                                | 1.6                                     | 5.5 10                                   | 12 24                               | 6.1                            | 14                                           | 14                                          | 3.0                       | 3.0 12                                    | 12                         | 17                         | 3.3                         | 3.7                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|       | 39.0                               | 44.4                                    | 56.4                                     | 32.7                                | 41.6                           | 5.0                                          | 6.0                                         | 51.0                      | 51.0                                      | 6.0                        | 6.0                        |                             |                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 15 16 |                                    | 6                                       |                                          | 20                                  | 6                              | 46                                           | 51                                          | 12                        |                                           | 46.5                       | 46.5                       | 12 37.4                     | 8 32.7                                            | standard deviation of the mean                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|       | 6                                  |                                         | 10                                       |                                     |                                | 14                                           | 14                                          |                           | 12                                        | 12                         | 12                         |                             |                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 14    | SEM                                | SEM                                     | SEM                                      | SEM                                 | STD                            | SEM                                          | SEM                                         | SEM                       | SEM                                       | SEM                        | SEM                        | STD                         | Chloral hydrate STD                               | STD                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|       | Pentobarbital                      | Pentobarbital                           | Thiobutabarbital                         | Pentobarbital                       | Chloral hydrate                | Keta- mine + pento-                          | barbital Keta- mine + pento-                | barbital Pentobarbi-      | tal + ketamine Pentobarbi- tal + ketamine | Pentobarbi- tal + ketamine | Pentobarbi- tal + ketamine | Urethane                    |                                                   | SEM  standard error of the mean,  dose); (8) route of administration; (9) duration of index ischemia duration (min); (10) coronary artery occluded; (11) reperfusion duration (h); (12) recovery (R) or non-recovery (NR); (13)   |
| 11    | 2                                  | LCA 24                                  | 4                                        | 2                                   | 2                              | 24                                           | LCA 24                                      | LAD 24                    | LAD 24                                    | LAD 24                     | LAD 24                     | LAD 2                       | LAD 48                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 10    | 30 LAD                             | 30                                      | 30 LAD                                   | 30 LAD                              | 30 LCA                         | 45 LCA                                       | 45                                          | 45                        | 45                                        | 45                         | 45                         | 30                          | 30                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 8     | i.p.                               | i.p.                                    |                                          |                                     | i.p.                           |                                              | i.v.                                        | i.v.                      | i.v.                                      | i.v.                       |                            | i.v.                        | i.p.                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 7     | (0.24 mg/kg)  2 h before  ischemia | (100 µg/kg)  1 h before                 | ischemia (50 mg/kg) at  reperfusion i.v. | (30 µmol/kg)  10 min prior to  i.v. | ischemia (14 µmol/ kg/day) for | ischemia (1 mg/kg) as a  bolus at 22.5  i.v. | of ischemia (500 µg/kg) as a  bolus at 22.5 | of ischemia (50 µg/kg) at | reperfusion (100 µg/kg) at  reperfusion   | (50 µg/kg) at  reperfusion | (100 µg/kg) at  i.v.       | reperfusion (14 µmol/kg) at | reperfusion (14 µmol/ kg/day) for  6 day prior to | left anterior descending,  LCA 2                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| 1 5 6 | 260-350 g 4CPI Pre                 | Toldo et al. [58] 32.4 ± 0.9 g Na2S Pre | 270-320 g ADT Post                       | NaHS Pre                            | 250-300 g NaHS Pre             | Post                                         | Post                                        | Post                      | NSHD-1 Post                               | NSHD-2 Post                | Post                       | Post                        | NaHS Pre                                          | LAD  left coronary artery,  The main characteristics included: (1) study reference; (2) species; (3) gender; (4) age or weight; (5)   H S booster; (6) time of intervention; (7); conditioning protocol (pre- or postconditioning |
| 4     | Rat M                              | Mouse M                                 | M                                        | 8 weeks                             |                                | 10-12 weeks 8a                               | 10-12 weeks 8I                              | 10-12 weeks NSHD-1        | 10-12 weeks                               | 10-12 weeks                | 10-12 weeks NSHD-2         | 200-250 g NaHS              | 250-300 g                                         | the included each study following ascending order from A to Z post  postconditioning,                                                                                                                                             |
| 2 3   |                                    |                                         |                                          | M                                   | M                              | M                                            | M                                           | M                         | M                                         | M                          | M                          | M                           | M                                                 | female,  pre  preconditioning,                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|       |                                    |                                         | Rat                                      | Rat                                 | Rat                            | Mouse                                        | Mouse                                       |                           |                                           |                            | Mouse                      | Rat                         | Rat                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|       |                                    |                                         |                                          |                                     |                                |                                              |                                             | Mouse                     | Mouse                                     | Mouse                      |                            |                             |                                                   | F                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|       | Testai et al. [57]                 |                                         | Xie et al. [63]                          | Yao et al. [65]                     | Yao et al. [66]                | Zhao et al. [68] a                           | Zhao et al.  [68] b                         | Zhao et al. [69] a        | Zhao et al.  [69] b                       | Zhao et al. [69] c         | Zhao et al.  [69] d        | Zhu et al. [70]             | Zhuo et al. [71]                                  | male,                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2 Preconditioning the heart with   H S in vivo. Forest plots of meta-analysis of preconditioning the heart with   H S boosters on myocardial 2 2 infarction, pooled using random-effect meta-analysis. Controlled comparisons included data from 116 control animals and 197 treated animals

| Study or Subgroup                              | Experimental   | Experimental   |     |     |    |     |         |                                             |                        |    |                      |    |
|------------------------------------------------|----------------|----------------|-----|-----|----|-----|---------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------|----|----------------------|----|
| Sivarajah 2006                                 | 45             | 5              |     |     |    | 3   | 3.78    | -15.00 [29.08,-0.92]                        |                        |    |                      |    |
| Sivarajah 2009                                 |                |                | 8   | 58  | 12 |     | 4.4%    | -13.00 [23.14,-2.86]                        |                        |    |                      |    |
| Snijder 2013                                   | 28             |                | 21  |     | 6  | 10  |         |                                             |                        |    |                      |    |
| Testai 2016                                    | 25             | 7              |     |     | 5  |     |         | -45.00 [ 49.09,-40.91] 414.00 [21.96,-6.04] |                        |    |                      |    |
| Toldo 2014                                     | 16             |                | 6   |     |    | 6   | 5.38    | -28.00 [32.53,-23.47]                       |                        |    |                      |    |
| Yao 2010                                       | 17             | 28             | 24  |     | 5  |     | 0.7%    | 416.00 [68.18, 36.18]                       |                        |    |                      |    |
| Yao 2012                                       | 31             |                |     |     |    |     | 4.89    | -11.00 [18.88,-3.12]                        |                        |    |                      |    |
| Zhuo 2009                                      | 22             |                |     | 33  |    |     | 5.1%    | 411.00 [-16.71,-5.29]                       |                        |    |                      |    |
| Total (95% CI)                                 | 197            | 197            | 197 | 197 |    | 116 | 100.036 | 20.25 [-25.02,-15.47]                       |                        |    |                      |    |
|                                                |                |                |     |     |    |     |         |                                             | 50                     |    |                      |    |
| Test for overall effect: Z= 8.31 (P &lt; 0.00001) |                |                |     |     |    |     |         |                                             | Favours [experimental] | 25 | 25 Favours [control] | 50 |

significant infarct limitation of - 21.61% (95% CI - 24.17, - 19.05; Fig. 3), a result which was derived from 166 control animals and 346   H S-treated animals ( 2 p &lt; 0.001; n = 35 comparisons). Likewise, we also observed a high degree of heterogeneity in the post-H S group ( 2 I 2 = 52%, p &lt; 0.001).

## Sensitivity analysis

We also investigated the effect of two crucial experimental variants which might influence the observed effect size, namely the experimental animal size and the source of   H S. 2 First, we divided each main group (i.e., pre-H S and post2 H2S) based on the size of the experimental model into small (mouse and rat) and large models (rabbit and pig). There was no significant difference in the overall effect size between the groups (pre-H S: 2 p = 0.3194, adjusted R 2 = 24.27% (Fig.  4a);  post-H 2 S: p =  0.6785,  adjusted R 2 =  4.74% (Fig. 4b). We also investigated whether any particular class of   H 2 S boosters have an impact on the efficacy of observed infarct limitation. Therefore, we divided each main group based on the class of   H S booster into inorganic, organic 2 and enhancer groups. Again, there was no significant difference in the overall effect size between these groups (preH2S: p = 0.1331, adjusted R 2 = 48.94% (Fig. 4a); post-H S: 2 p = 0.8959, adjusted R 2 = 3.60% (Fig. 4b).

We examined the robustness of our findings by re-running our meta-analysis using SMD instead of WMD. Interestingly, the results were similar in both cases and   H S, again, 2 showed infarct limitation.   H S-induced preconditioning 2 limited infarct size by - 2.46% (95% CI - 3.20, - 1.72, p &lt; 0.001, Fig. 5) compared to control group with a similar degree of heterogeneity ( I 2 = 76%). Likewise, postconditioning the heart with   H S boosters reduced myocardial 2 infarction by - 2.11% (95% CI - 2.54, - 1.67, p &lt; 0.001, Fig. 6) compared to the control heart with a similar degree of heterogeneity ( I 2 = 63%).

## Risk of bias

We used a 20-point scoring scale to evaluate the quality of study reporting for included papers derived from ARRIVE guideline (Fig. 7). Included papers scored a median of 17 out of 20 with an interquartile range of 3. We also assessed the publication bias for the included papers by plotting the effect size (WMD) of each controlled comparison against its SD for pre-H S and post-H S groups using funnel plot (Fig. 8). 2 2 Visual inspection of funnel plots showed that there might be underrepresentation of studies with negative or small effects. Furthermore, we also noticed that there were a few studies with moderate variance among included studies.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3 Postconditioning the heart with   H S in vivo. Forest plots of meta-analysis of postconditioning the heart with   H S boosters on myocardial 2 2 infarction, pooled using random-effect meta-analysis. Controlled comparisons included data from 346 control animals and 166 treated animals

| Kang 2016 a                                     | 28   | 19   | 12   | 48   | 6   |     | 2.88   |                        |
|-------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|------|-----|-----|--------|------------------------|
| Kang 2016 b                                     | 17   | 9    |      |      | 6   |     |        |                        |
| Kang 2016 c                                     | 21   |      | 12   |      |     |     |        |                        |
| Kang 2016 d                                     | 19   |      |      |      |     | 6   | 3.29   |                        |
| Kang 2016 e                                     | 30   |      |      |      |     | 11  |        |                        |
| Kang 2016 f                                     |      |      |      |      | 9   | 10  |        |                        |
| Karwi 2016 a                                    | 28   | 13   |      | 53   | 15  |     | 1.5%   |                        |
| Karwi 2016 b                                    |      |      |      | 57   |     |     | 2.5%   |                        |
| Karwi 2017a                                     | 43   |      |      | 53   |     | 2   |        |                        |
| Karwi 2017 b                                    | 32   | 9    | 8    | 53   | "   | 2   | 1.68   |                        |
| Karwi 2017 c                                    | 30   |      |      | 53   |     |     |        |                        |
| Lougiakis 2016                                  | 25   | 2    |      | 48   |     |     |        |                        |
| Osipov 2009                                     | 16   | 16   |      |      |     | 3   |        |                        |
| Predmore 2012 a                                 | 25   |      | 14   | 52   |     |     | 3.69   |                        |
| Predmore 2012 b                                 | 19   |      | 6    | 54   |     |     | 3.79   |                        |
| Salloum 2012 b                                  | 22   |      |      | 37   |     |     | 5.1%   |                        |
| Salloum 2012 d                                  | 17   |      |      | 43   |     |     |        |                        |
| Xie 2015                                        | 36   | 9    | 10   | 56   |     |     |        |                        |
|                                                 |      |      |      | 46   |     | 5   | 1.99   |                        |
| Zhao 2013a                                      | 29   |      |      |      |     | 14  | 2.0%   |                        |
| Zhao 2013 b                                     | 32   |      | 14   |      |     |     | 2.1%   |                        |
| Zhao 2015 a                                     | 55   |      | 6    |      |     | 3   |        |                        |
| Zhao 2015 b                                     | 33   |      |      |      |     | 3   | 2.1%   |                        |
| Zhao 2015 €                                     | 26   |      |      |      |     |     |        |                        |
| Zhao 2015 d                                     | 24   |      |      |      |     |     |        |                        |
| Zhu 2016                                        | 19   |      |      |      |     |     | 6.28   |                        |
| Total (953 CI)                                  | 346  | 346  | 346  |      |     | 166 | 100.03 |                        |
|                                                 |      |      |      |      |     |     |        | 50 25                  |
| Test íor overall effect: Z= 16.53 (P &lt; 0.00001) |      |      |      |      |     |     |        |                        |
|                                                 |      |      |      |      |     |     |        | Favours [experimental] |

## Discussion

The major findings of our systematic review and meta-analysis are that   H 2 S has a consistent and robust infarct-limiting effect against MIRI in pre-clinical studies. This robust effect was comparable when   H S boosters were given before the 2 onset of ischemia (preconditioning) or at the time of reperfusion (postconditioning) based on in vivo data from almost 900 animals. This cardioprotection also was independent from the animal size or the class of   H S booster. 2

The mechanism of   H S-induced conditioning-like phe2 nomena is not fully understood yet, despite several signalling molecules and pathways have been suggested to play a role. However, we here discussed potential conditioning mechanism(s) of   H S based on the in vivo evidence included 2 in this study. We took into consideration the causal and temporal consequences of conditioning events and used a structuring scheme previously proposed by Heusch [24]. This scheme is based on the general consensus that conditioning maneuver triggers a 'stimulus' which in turn activates a 'mediator' to transfer the cardioprotective signal to its

'target'. In fact,   H 2 S itself has been demonstrated to be a crucial 'chemical stimulus' of ischemic pre- [67] and postconditioning [28] to elicit their infarct-limiting effect. Augmented level of   H S activates similar signalling molecules 2 and pathways to act as mediators to transmit its cardioprotective signal to its target(s). These signalling pathways mainly involve activating the RISK pathway components in the first minutes of reperfusion [3, 9, 10, 13, 33, 38, 45, 49, 65]. Notably, the activity of some micro-RNAs, namely microRNA-21 [58] and mirco-RNA-1 [30], were also reported to serve as mediators of   H S-induced cardioprotection. The 2 key target of   H 2 S's protection is the mitochondria, where the majority of salvage signalling pathways converges. Enhanced   H S level protects against myocardial infarction 2 via preserving mitochondrial function [17], maintaining membrane integrity [17, 65], limiting mitochondrial ROS generation [32] and inhibiting the opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pore (PTP) [10, 32, 65]. Moreover, mitochondrial   K ATP channel is another target of   H S protec2 tion [54, 55, 57]. However, the question yet to be answered is how   H S triggers these signalling pathways to exert its 2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4 Impact of experimental variables on the overall effect size of a preconditioning and b postconditioning with   H S. Subgroup strati2 fication  was  used  to  obtain  the  weighted  mean  difference  (WMD) along with the corresponding 95% confidence interval (95% CI) followed by meta-regression to obtain the p value and avoid false-positive  results.  Studies  that  employed  mice  and  rats  were  grouped  as a  'small  animals'  group,  while  those  that  used  rabbit  and  pig  were

grouped as a 'large animals' group. Studies were also grouped based on the source of   H S to 'inorganic' which included sulfide salts and 2 gas,  'organic'  and  'enhancers'  which  included  phosphodiesterase inhibitors.  The  dotted  line  indicates  the  weighted  mean  difference (WMD). None of the experimental variables had a significant effect on the observed effect size

infarct-limiting effect? It is highly unlikely that   H S activates 2 the RISK pathway through a ligand/receptor-based mechanism as   H S is a gaseous molecule and not a ligand. The 2 most plausible mechanism could be through inducing posttranslation modifications (PTMs). Similar to nitrosylation, sulfhydration (or persulfidation) is a PTM induced by   H S 2 which could modify the structure and eventually the function of several proteins and channels. Recently, it has been demonstrated that   H S activates PI3K/Akt signalling path2 ways through sulfhydrating phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) abrogating its inhibitory effect [62]. Furthermore, sulfhydration is demonstrated to modify the activity of mitochondrial   K ATP channel, another target of   H S [54, 55, 57], 2 and ATP synthase   (F F  ATP synthase/complex V) [39], 1 0 the current proposed main component of PTP, which either is known to protect the mitochondria and eventually limit infarct size. Taken together, the role of sulfhydration in conditioning with   H S needs further investigation. 2

There are a number of important aspects which we observed in our review. Despite highly consistent overall effect size, we noticed a high degree of heterogeneity between the included studies. We conducted subgroup analyses to investigate whether some of the experimental  variables which we predefined could influence the observed effect size and/or heterogeneity using metaregression.  Others  have  previously  shown,  applying the same approach, that experimental model size could have a significant impact on effect size and heterogeneity observed with meta-analysis. For example, Lim et al. [37] reported that cyclosporine-induced infarct limitation in rodent models was absent in a large model (swine) of MIRI in vivo. Noteworthily, this could potentially explain the  neutral  clinical  data  of  cyclosporine  treatment  in STEMI patients [25]. However, Bromage et al. [6] recently showed that the infarct limitation by remote ischemic conditioning manoeuvre was consistent across in vivo studies, independently of the model size. Similarly, we previously

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5 Sensitivity test for the overall infarct limitation by pre-H S in vivo. The overall effect size was calculated using standardised mean differ2 ence (SMD), pooled using random-effect meta-analysis. Controlled comparisons included data from 116 control animals and 197 treated animals

|                |     |     |     |    |    | Total   |        |                        |    |
|----------------|-----|-----|-----|----|----|---------|--------|------------------------|----|
|                |     |     |     | 25 |    |         |        |                        |    |
|                |     |     |     |    |    |         |        | -3.70 [6.05,-1.36]     |    |
| Li 2015 c      |     | 6   | 8   |    | 6  | 3       |        |                        |    |
| Salloum 2009 a | 2   |     | 6   |    | 6  | 6       | 3.69   | -5.07 [7.79,-2.35]     |    |
| Salloum 2009 b |     | 5   | 6   | 1  | 6  |         | 2.28   | -4.55 [8.73,-0.37]     |    |
| Salloum 2012a  |     |     | 6   |    |    | 3       |        | -10.67 [17.38,-3.95]   |    |
| Salloum 2012 c |     | 12  | 6   |    | 12 | 2       | 3.79   | 43.02 [5.64,-0.40]     |    |
| Salloum 2015   | 16  | 8   | 6   |    | 9  | 2       | 3.59   | -3.30 [6.07,-0.52]     |    |
| Sivarajah 2006 | 44  | 5   | 7   |    | 12 | 3       | 5.1%   | 41.83 [3.53,-0.13]     |    |
| Sivarajah 2009 |     | 9   | 8   | 58 |    | 6       |        | 41.29 [-2.49,-0.09]    |    |
| Snijder 2013   | 28  |     | 2   |    |    | 10      | 3.88   | -9.30 [11.89,-6.71]    |    |
| Testai 2016    | 25  | 7   |     |    |    | 3       | 4.98   | 41.92 [3.74,-0.10]     |    |
| Toldo 2014     | 16  |     | 6   |    |    | 6       |        |                        |    |
| Yao 2010       | 37  | 28  | 24  |    |    |         | 6.1%   | -0.49 [1.56, 0.58]     |    |
| Yao 2012       |     | 5   |     | 42 |    | 3       |        | 41.84 [3.63,-0.05]     |    |
| Zhuo 2009      | 22  |     | 8   | 33 |    |         |        |                        |    |
| Total (95% CI) | 197 | 197 | 197 |    |    | 116     | 100.08 | -2.46 [-3.20,-1.72]    |    |
|                |     |     |     |    |    |         |        | 20                     |    |
|                |     |     |     |    |    |         |        | Favours [experimental] | 20 |

demonstrated that enhanced level of nitric oxide (NO) in vivo, using different NO treatments, exerted infarct limitation independently of the model size across (22) preclinical studies [4]. Our subgroup analyses showed that model size (rodent vs. non-rodent model) did not have a significant effect on either effect size or heterogeneity of H2S treatments in both pre-H S and post-H S groups. 2 2

We also assessed whether using different   H S boosters 2 as a pharmacological approach to enhance   H S level could 2 behave differently in terms of infarct limitation and heterogeneity. There have been number of approaches employed to enhance   H S level in vivo to investigate its effect on myo2 cardial infarction. Inorganic sulfide salts, namely NaHS and Na2S, were the first class of   H S boosters initially utilised to 2 investigate the significance of enhancement   H S on myocar2 dial infarction. However, they are impure salts that cause a sharp and short-lasting increase in   H S level in vivo which 2 make them unreliable   H S boosters. Furthermore, off-target 2 or even toxic effects are highly likely with the burst of   H S 2 achieved using sulfide salts due to the fact that   H S has a 2 narrow therapeutic window. More stable and controllable organic   H 2 S donors have been designed to overcome this limitation and have demonstrated infarct-limiting effect in vivo [10, 33, 57, 68]. Utilising triphenylphosphonium scaffold approach to target the mitochondria, we and others have recently reported infarct limitation in vivo using

AP39, a mitochondrial-targeting   H S donor [10, 32], which 2 have a significant implication considering the central role of mitochondria in MIRI. In a similar context, we have recently reported that the limit of infarct reduction by different NO donors at reperfusion was consistently comparable [4]. Although there was a pattern of increased efficacy of postconditioning with   H S enhancers, there was significant 2 difference in the efficacy of any of the   H S booster groups 2 in terms of infarct limitation at the two times of intervention. To note, the number of studies that employed large animal models was less than those that used small animals. Furthermore, we also noticed that the cardioprotective dose of some   H S boosters could vary between different animal 2 models. For instance, cardioprotective dose of GYY4137, a slow-releasing   H S donor, was (26.6 µmol/kg) in the mouse 2 model [10], while it was 10 times more in rat [33]. There is no obvious reason why the cardioprotection dose of these boosters might vary. However, it has been shown that there is a certain degree of dependency of   H S on NO signalling 2 to induce its cardioprotection. Arguably, this dependency on NO seems to be high in mouse [3] and partially fading as the animal size increase, such as in rat [33] until it becomes insignificant in large animals, such as rabbit [3]. Whether this hypothesis explains the variation in the cardioprotective dose of some   H S boosters requires further investigation. 2

Fig. 7 Study reporting quality assessment. The research quality of included studies were evaluated independently by two reviewers according to the quality of study reporting using our pre-defined 20-item quality scoring system. Data were reported as a percentage for each quality item

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6 Sensitivity test for the overall infarct limitation by post-H S in vivo. The overall effect size was calculated using standardised mean differ2 ence (SMD), pooled using random-effect meta-analysis. Controlled comparisons included data from 346 control animals and 166 treated animals

|                                                | Experimental   | Experimental   | Experimental   |    |    |     |           |                     |                                          |    |
|------------------------------------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----|----|-----|-----------|---------------------|------------------------------------------|----|
| Study or Subgroup                              |                |                |                |    |    |     |           |                     |                                          |    |
|                                                | 16             | 3              | 8              | 38 | 12 | 3   | 1.48      |                     |                                          |    |
| Chatzianastasiou 2016 a                        | 18             | 5              |                |    |    | 2   | 2.1%      |                     |                                          |    |
| Chatzianastasiou 2016 b                        | 20             | 3              | 8              | 38 | 9  | 2   | 1.88      | 43.83 [6.49,-1.18]  |                                          |    |
| Chatzianastasiou 2016 c                        |                |                | 8              |    | 9  | 2   | 1.68      |                     |                                          |    |
| Chatzianastasiou 2016 d                        | 14             |                | 8              |    | 9  | 2   | 2.38      |                     |                                          |    |
| Chen 2016 a                                    | 25             | 6              | 18             |    |    | 5   | 3.78      | -2.31 [3.54,-1.08]  |                                          |    |
| Chen 2016 b                                    | 27             |                |                |    | 9  | 5   | 3.68      | -2.53 [3.81,-1.26]  |                                          |    |
| Elrod 2007 a                                   | 13             |                | 8              |    | 1  | 3   | 1.48      |                     |                                          |    |
| Elrod 2007 b                                   | 30             |                |                |    |    | 8   | 3.68      |                     |                                          |    |
| Kang 2016 a                                    | 28             |                |                |    |    | 6   | 4.0%      | 41.18 [2.26,-0.11]  |                                          |    |
| Kang 2016 b                                    |                |                |                |    |    | 6   | 3.09      |                     |                                          |    |
| Kang 2016 €                                    |                |                |                |    |    | 6   | 3.78      |                     |                                          |    |
| Kang 2016 d                                    | {              |                |                |    |    | 6   | 3.68      | -2.25 [3.54,-0.97)  |                                          |    |
| Kang 2016 e                                    | 34             |                |                |    |    |     | 4.29      | 1.18[2.13,-0.24]    |                                          |    |
| Kang 2016 í                                    | 40             |                |                |    |    | 10  | 4.38      |                     |                                          |    |
| Karwwi 2016 a                                  | 28             | 1              | 8              |    |    | 3   |           |                     |                                          |    |
|                                                | 28             |                |                |    |    | 2   | 1.48      | -4.49 [7.67,-1.31]  |                                          |    |
| Karwwi 2017 a                                  | 43             |                | 8              |    | "  | 2   |           |                     |                                          |    |
|                                                | 32             | 8              | 8              |    |    | 2   |           |                     |                                          |    |
| Karwi 2017 &amp;                                   |                |                |                |    |    | 2   |           |                     | 1                                        |    |
| Lougiakis 2016                                 | 25             | 18             |                |    |    |     | 0.38      | -9.68 [17.64,-1.73] |                                          |    |
| Osipov 2009                                    | 16             | 9              | 6 14           |    |    |     |           |                     |                                          |    |
| Predrore 2012a                                 | 25             |                |                |    |    | 6   | 3.48      |                     |                                          |    |
| Predmore 2012 b Salloum 2012 b                 | 19             |                | 6              |    |    | 6   | 2.1%      | -4.09 [6.38,-1.79]  |                                          |    |
|                                                |                | 5              |                |    |    | 6   |           | 42.77 [4.53,-1.01]  |                                          |    |
| Sallour 2012 d                                 |                | 9              | 6              |    |    | 6   |           |                     |                                          |    |
| Xie 2015                                       |                | 9              |                |    |    |     |           |                     |                                          |    |
| Zhao 2013a                                     | 29             |                |                |    |    | 5   |           | -0.80 [1.58,-0.03]  |                                          |    |
| Zhao 2013 b                                    | 32             |                |                |    |    | 14  | 4.59 4.5% | -0.94 (1.73,-0.15)  |                                          |    |
| Zhao 2015 a                                    | 55             |                |                |    |    | 3   |           | 0.26 (1.14, 1.65]   |                                          |    |
| Zhao 2015 b                                    | 33             |                |                |    |    | 3   | 3.5%      | 41.05 [2.39, 0.29]  |                                          |    |
| Zhao 2015 c                                    | 26             |                |                |    |    | 3   | 3.68      | -0.78 [2.09, 0.53]  |                                          |    |
| Zhao 2015 d                                    | 24             |                |                |    |    | 3   | 3.68      |                     |                                          |    |
| Zhu 2016                                       | 19             | 2              |                |    | 3  |     |           | -7.56 [10.78,-4.34] |                                          |    |
| Total (95% CI)                                 |                |                | 346            |    |    | 166 | 100.03    | 2.11 [-2.54,-1.67]  |                                          |    |
| Test for overall effect: Z= 9.48 (P &lt; 0.00001) |                |                |                |    |    |     |           |                     |                                          |    |
|                                                |                |                |                |    |    |     |           |                     | Favours [experimental] Favours [control] |    |
|                                                |                |                |                |    |    |     |           |                     |                                          | 20 |
|                                                |                |                |                |    |    |     |           | 20                  |                                          |    |

<!-- image -->

Yes

No

<!-- image -->

Fig. 8 Evaluation of publication bias. A funnel plot showing the precision of the effect estimate in a preconditioning group and b postconditioning group. The dotted line indicates the weighted mean difference (MD). SE standard error

<!-- image -->

We were also interested in assessing the impact of other experimental variables which are also important on the external validity of our findings. As our main aim in this review was to characterise the effect of   H S on infarct size 2 across the preclinical studies, we, accordingly, excluded all studies which utilised animals with co-morbidities, comedications and risk factors such as diabetes, heart failure, hypertension or hypercholesterolemia. Therefore, insufficient number of studies in this review rendered these analyses not applicable. Nevertheless, in vivo preclinical studies utilised animals with co-morbidities which were identified in our literature search are summarised in (Table 3). This table is very helpful and has a considerable value for the field of cardioprotection with   H S as a starting point for future 2 investigations characterising the impact of co-morbidities on   H 2 S protection. Co-morbidities and risk factors associated with cardiovascular disease are important determinants of the efficacy of any cardioprotective therapy and this has recently been discussed in some position papers by others [8, 20, 21, 23]. There is a significant contrast in the biological milieu between the experimental animals and the patients. The majority of the cardioprotective interventions that have been tested in a 'reductionist model' employing young and healthy animals, arguably to effectively control the experimental conditions [50]. However, the vast majority of patients recruited in the randomised clinical trials have co-morbidities and/or risk factors including diabetes, aging, hyperlipidemia and hypertension. These co-morbidities and risk factors are shown to modify the efficacy of several cardioprotective interventions [20, 22]. In addition, the potential impact of background medications on the examined efficacy of cardioprotective therapies is often neglected in the pre-clinical studies, despite the fact that most of the recruited patients are on standard medications. Similarly, current standard care could substantially alter the potency

of cardioprotective therapies via either blocking the signalling pathway or elevating the threshold which is needed to produce the cardioprotection [22, 47]. Therefore, clinical translation could be considerably enhanced through conducting future preclinical studies on animals with co-morbidities and from a background of standard medications.

Another important experimental variable is gender, taking into consideration the cardioprotection of oestrogen which is mainly mediated by triggering the reperfusion injury salvage kinase (RISK) pathway [42], a common signalling pathway with   H S [33]. However, only 9% of 2 included studies employed mixed gender. Another dimension to the reductionist model often employed in the preclinical studies is the use of a single therapy which is too simplistic and underestimates the clinical complexity. In the view of the current failure in clinical translation, the use of two or more drugs in what is often called 'combination therapy' has been suggested as an alternative approach [22]. Especially, some combination treatments have shown promising benefits in vivo [64] and in human [16]. With the current advanced feasibility in designing   H S boosters 2 which target different cellular compartments, it is tempting to suggest that combination therapy of different   H S boost2 ers could potentially enhance the efficacy of   H S-induced 2 cardioprotection. Especially, different   H S boosters signal 2 through different protective mechanisms and could potentially have additive infarct-limiting effect to each other which maximise the beneficial effect [1, 32]. Despite this very tempting idea along with very encouraging experimental data, this concept has not been investigated yet and needs to be conducted in well-designed studies. We have listed   H S 2 boosters which we think have potential clinical translatability along with proposed mechanism(s) of cardioprotection (Table 4). This table would have a great value for the field

ischemia

Table 3 Summary of pre-clinical studies investigated infarct-limiting effect of   H S using animals with co-morbidities 2

| STD 6 44.0 7.2 6 31.2 4.7   | 7 74.2 3.1 8 62.0 3.0            | barbital 3.1 7 56.3 3.4     | NR Ketamine + pento- barbital 3.1 5 60.1 5.0   | 3.1 5 68.2 3.2 1.8 10 53.9 2.0 barbital 2   | 4.6 6 55.0 2.4 N R barbital       | 1.8 8 60.0 1.5         | 1.8 10 46.5 2.4                   |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| 30 LAD                      | (0.05 mg/kg) at reper- fusion 30 | 30 LCA NR Ketamine + pento- | i.v. 30 LCA 4                                  | (1 mg/kg) at reperfu- i.v. 30 LCA 30 LCA    | 30 LCA Ketamine + pento-          | 30 LCA                 | 30 LCA                            |
| 2                           | 4                                | 4                           |                                                | 4 24                                        |                                   |                        | 2                                 |
|                             |                                  | 74.2                        | 74.2                                           | 74.2 68.4                                   | 67.4 73.5                         |                        | 73.5                              |
|                             |                                  | 7                           | 7                                              | 7 10                                        | 6 8                               |                        | 8                                 |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                | SEM                                         | SEM                               |                        | SEM                               |
|                             | SEM                              | SEM                         | SEM                                            | SEM                                         | SEM                               |                        |                                   |
| Chloral hydrate             | Ketamine + pento- barbital       |                             |                                                | Ketamine + pento- Ketamine + pento-         | N R Ketamine + pento-             |                        | Ketamine + pento-                 |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                | barbital                                    |                                   |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                |                                             | barbital                          |                        |                                   |
| NR                          | NR                               |                             |                                                | R                                           |                                   |                        | N R                               |
| NaHS                        | Lambert et al. [35] a Na2S       | M 12 weeks Na2S Post        |                                                | NR Na2S                                     | Na2S                              | Na2S                   | Na2S                              |
|                             | LCA                              | i.v.                        |                                                | Na2S Post                                   |                                   |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                | sion                                        |                                   |                        |                                   |
| i.p.                        | Post i.v.                        |                             |                                                | i.v.                                        | i.v. 4                            | i.v.                   | i.v.                              |
|                             |                                  | fusion                      |                                                | (0.1 mg/kg) at reper-                       | fusion                            |                        |                                   |
| Pre                         |                                  |                             | Na2S Post                                      | Post                                        | Post (0.1 mg/kg) at reper- fusion | Pre                    | Pre                               |
| (14 µmol/kg) daily          |                                  |                             | fusion                                         |                                             | (0.1 mg/kg) the day               |                        | before ischemia (0.1 mg/kg) daily |
|                             |                                  | (0.1 mg/kg) at reper-       | (0.5 mg/kg) at reper-                          |                                             |                                   |                        |                                   |
| M 250-30 g                  | M 12 weeks                       |                             | M 12 weeks                                     | M 12 weeks M 12 weeks                       | M 12 weeks M 12 weeks             | M 12 weeks M 12 weeks  | M 12 weeks                        |
| Streptozocin-induced        | Diabetic (db/db)  mouse          | mouse                       |                                                |                                             |                                   |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  | Diabetic (db/db)            |                                                | Diabetic (db/db)                            | mouse                             |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  | Lambert et al. [35] b       |                                                |                                             |                                   |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  | Lambert et al. [35] c       |                                                |                                             |                                   |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                | Lambert et al. [35] d                       | Diabetic (db/db)                  |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                |                                             |                                   | mouse Diabetic (db/db) | mouse Diabetic (db/db)            |
|                             |                                  |                             | Diabetic (db/db)  mouse                        |                                             |                                   |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                | Diabetic (db/db)                            |                                   |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                | mouse                                       |                                   |                        |                                   |
| Gao et al. [19]             |                                  |                             |                                                |                                             | Peake et al. [46] a               |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                |                                             |                                   | Peake et al. [46] b    | Peake et al. [46] b               |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                | Lambert et al. [35] e                       |                                   |                        |                                   |
|                             |                                  |                             |                                                |                                             | Lambert et al. [35] f             |                        |                                   |

Different letters refer to different studies and experimental groups within each included study (i.e. reference) and have been given according to how these studies or experimental group appear in the included each study following ascending order from A to Z M male, F female, pre preconditioning, post postconditioning, LAD left anterior descending, LCA left coronary artery, SEM standard error of the mean, STD standard deviation of the mean The main characteristics included: (1) study reference; (2) species; (3) gender; (4) age or weight; (5) H2S booster; (6) time of intervention; (7); conditioning protocol (pre- or postconditioning dose); (8) route of administration; (9) duration of index ischemia duration (min); (10) coronary artery occluded; (11) reperfusion duration (h); (12) recovery (R) or non-recovery (NR); (13) induction anaesthetic; (14) measure of variance; (15) control group sample size; (16) control group mean infarct size; (17) control group variance; (18) conditioning group sample size; (19) conditioning group mean infarct size; (20) conditioning group variance

Table 4 List of   H 2 S boosters with potential clinical translatability and proposed mechanism of infarct limitation

|    | H2S booster    | Efficacy to limit  infarct size (%)   | Proposed mechanism(s)                                                                                                                                                  | References   |
|----|----------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
|  1 | GYY4137        | 31-51                                 | Activates PI3K/Akt/eNOS/GSK-3β signalling pathway                                                                                                                      | [10, 30, 32] |
|  2 | Thiovalin      | 62                                    | Triggers eNOS/NO signalling pathway                                                                                                                                    | [10]         |
|  3 | AP39           | 43-56                                 | Signals independently of cytosolic signalling pathways Limits mitochondrial ROS generation Inhibits   Ca 2+ -induced PTP opening in a cyclophilin-D-independent manner | [10, 31]     |
|  4 | hs-MB          | 39                                    | Unknown                                                                                                                                                                | [11]         |
|  5 | Ad.PKGIα       | 62                                    | Activates PKG                                                                                                                                                          | [12]         |
|  6 | Zofenopril     | 29                                    | Activates eNOS and increases plasma NO level Upregulates the expression of antioxidant enzymes (thioredoxin-1, glutathione peroxi- dase-1 and sodium dismutase-1)      | [13]         |
|  7 | JK-1           | 43-64                                 | Unknown                                                                                                                                                                | [30]         |
|  8 | JK-2           | 55                                    | Unknown                                                                                                                                                                | [30]         |
|  9 | 4-OH-TBZ       | 48                                    | Unknown                                                                                                                                                                | [36]         |
| 10 | DATS           | 65                                    | Activates eNOS/NO signalling pathway                                                                                                                                   | [46]         |
| 11 | Tadalafil      | 68                                    | Activates PKG                                                                                                                                                          | [48]         |
| 12 | Cinaciguat     | 62-77                                 | Increases PKG activity and CSE expression                                                                                                                              | [49]         |
| 13 | Beetroot juice | 66                                    | Unknown                                                                                                                                                                | [50]         |
| 14 | 4CPI           | 36                                    | Activates mitochondrial   K ATP  channel                                                                                                                               | [54]         |
| 15 | ADT            | 36                                    | Activates AMPK and autophagic flux                                                                                                                                     | [60]         |
| 16 | 8a             | 38                                    | Unknown                                                                                                                                                                | [65]         |
| 17 | 8I             | 38                                    | Unknown                                                                                                                                                                | [65]         |
| 18 | NSHD-1         | 36                                    | Unknown                                                                                                                                                                | [66]         |
| 19 | NSHD-2         | 45                                    | Unknown                                                                                                                                                                | [66]         |

of cardioprotection and very helpful to test the concept of combination therapy in future investigations.

We also evaluated the internal validity of included studies including the quality of study reporting and publication bias and how these factors could have an impact on the observed results. The lack of full and comprehensive description of the methodological approach and study design could result in an overestimated effect size. By subjecting the included reports to our reporting quality assessment, included studies generally scored highly which is strengthening the validity of our study and it is due to our stringent inclusion criteria. Nevertheless, there was particularly poor reporting in a number of aspects including reporting any adverse effects (28%), a main determinant in any drug development. Reporting of sample size calculation was also poor (43%) which raises some important question regarding whether the study was sufficiently powered before commencing the experiments or allowed to continue until certain number of animals per group was achieved. Insufficient adherence to good quality research indicators could inevitably lead to false-positive results and overestimation of the effect size. As a consequence, this might subsequently lead to further testing of a particular treatment in clinical trial, as a logical consequence, which would be unethical and unnecessary. Furthermore, low standard study reporting makes it difficult to ascertain whether the study was conducted according to

high-quality research standards which eventually assuring that the data are valid. Noteworthily, failing to report a good quality research could possibility account for the observed heterogeneity in this meta-analysis. Nevertheless, the effect size by   H 2 S was consistent and robust despite the observed high heterogeneity which is reassuring.

We also investigated the publication bias within the included studies using funnel plot. The visual examination and the distribution of the effect size along with the precision of the measurement suggested that there might be an underrepresentation of studies with neutral or negative effect as well as studies with moderate precision in our analysis. However, it needs to be stressed here that studies with neutral or negative data are often not given priority, if at all, to be submitted for publication by the majority of the research groups especially that it is highly likely that they will be rejected at the peer review stage.

## Limitation

This review has included all studies which met our stringent inclusion criteria. However, we acknowledge that we were limited by not including papers which are not published in English language for a time and financial limitations. We

also had to exclude studies with missing data or those which failed our critical appraisal to enhance the validity of this meta-analysis. Furthermore, we could not identify any particular variable behind the high degree of heterogeneity using our pre-defined experimental variables. In addition, we also acknowledge that the ARRIVE guideline was launched in June 2010 in the UK, while significant number of studies included in our analysis were either published before this date or conducted outside the UK.

## Conclusion

This systematic review and meta-analysis shows a robust and highly reproducible infarct-limiting effect of   H S against 2 MIRI in pre-clinical studies. This robust effect was similar when   H S was administrated before the onset of regional 2 ischemia or at reperfusion despite the observed high heterogeneity which is reassuring. The current feasibility of designing stable and controllable   H S boosters and selec2 tively targeting specific cellular compartments offer a unique opportunity to use a combination therapy of different   H S 2 boosters, which signal through different cardioprotective mechanisms, as an adjunct to standard reperfusion protocol. The focus of future investigations should be on characterising the observed infarct-sparing effect of   H S in large 2 animal with co-morbidities, such as diabetes and age, and from background of the current standard polypharmacy in a well-designed preclinical studies.

Acknowledgements QGK acknowledges the generous support of University of Diyala and the Iraqi Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research.

Author contributions QGK, JSB and GFB conceived and designed the study. QGK and JSB were the primary reviewers, while GFB was the secondary reviewer during literature search and data collection. QGK prepared the manuscript which was finalised and approved for submission by all authors.

## Compliance with ethical standards

Conflict of interest The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

<!-- image -->

## References

- 1. Andreadou I, Iliodromitis EK, Rassaf T, Schulz R, Papapetropoulos A, Ferdinandy P (2015) The role of gasotransmitters NO, H2S and CO in myocardial ischaemia/reperfusion injury and cardioprotection by preconditioning, postconditioning and remote conditioning. Br J Pharmacol 172:1587-1606. https://doi.org/10.1111/ bph.12811
- 2. Bell RM, Botker HE, Carr RD, Davidson SM, Downey JM, Dutka DP, Heusch G, Ibanez B, Macallister R, Stoppe C, Ovize M, Redington A, Walker JM, Yellon DM (2016) 9th hatter biannual meeting: position document on ischaemia/reperfusion injury, conditioning and the ten commandments of cardioprotection. Basic Res Cardiol 111:41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00395-016-0558-1
- 3. Bibli SI, Andreadou I, Chatzianastasiou A, Tzimas C, Sanoudou D, Kranias E, Brouckaert P, Coletta C, Szabo C, Kremastinos DT, Iliodromitis EK, Papapetropoulos A (2015) Cardioprotection by H2S engages a cGMP-dependent protein kinase G/phospholamban pathway. Cardiovasc Res 106:432-442. https://doi.org/10.1093/ cvr/cvv129
- 4. Bice JS, Jones BR, Chamberlain GR, Baxter GF (2016) Nitric oxide treatments as adjuncts to reperfusion in acute myocardial infarction: a systematic review of experimental and clinical studies. Basic Res Cardiol 111:23. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00395-016-0540-y
- 5. Bos EM, van Goor H, Joles JA, Whiteman M, Leuvenink HG (2015) Hydrogen sulfide: physiological properties and therapeutic potential in ischaemia. Br J Pharmacol 172:1479-1493. https:// doi.org/10.1111/bph.12869
- 6. Bromage DI, Pickard JM, Rossello X, Ziff OJ, Burke N, Yellon DM, Davidson SM (2017) Remote ischaemic conditioning reduces infarct size in animal in vivo models of ischaemia-reperfusion injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Res 113:288-297. https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvw219
- 7. Bulluck H, Yellon DM, Hausenloy DJ (2016) Reducing myocardial infarct size: challenges and future opportunities. Heart 102:341-348. https://doi.org/10.1136/heartjnl-2015-307855
- 8. Cabrera-Fuentes HA, Alba-Alba C, Aragones J, Bernhagen J, Boisvert WA, Botker HE, Cesarman-Maus G, Fleming I, GarciaDorado D, Lecour S, Liehn E, Marber MS, Marina N, Mayr M, Perez-Mendez O, Miura T, Ruiz-Meana M, Salinas-Estefanon EM, Ong SB, Schnittler HJ, Sanchez-Vega JT, Sumoza-Toledo A, Vogel CW, Yarullina D, Yellon DM, Preissner KT, Hausenloy DJ (2016) Meeting report from the 2nd international symposium on new frontiers in cardiovascular research. protecting the cardiovascular system from ischemia: between bench and bedside. Basic Res Cardiol 111:7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00395-015-0527-0
- 9. Calvert JW, Jha S, Gundewar S, Elrod JW, Ramachandran A, Pattillo CB, Kevil CG, Lefer DJ (2009) Hydrogen sulfide mediates cardioprotection through Nrf2 signaling. Circ Res 105:365-374. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.199919
- 10. Chatzianastasiou A, Bibli SI, Andreadou I, Efentakis P, Kaludercic N, Wood ME, Whiteman M, Di Lisa F, Daiber A, Manolopoulos VG, Szabo C, Papapetropoulos A (2016) Cardioprotection by   H 2 S donors: nitric oxide-dependent and -independent mechanisms. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 106:432-442. https://doi. org/10.1124/jpet.116.235119
- 11. Chen GB, Yang L, Zhong LT, Kutty S, Wang YG, Cui K, Xiu JC, Cao SP, Huang QB, Liao WJ, Liao YL, Wu JF, Zhang WZ, Bin JP (2016) Delivery of hydrogen sulfide by ultrasound targeted microbubble destruction attenuates myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. Sci Rep 6:30643-30456. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep30643
- 12. Das A, Samidurai A, Hoke NN, Kukreja RC, Salloum FN (2015) Hydrogen sulfide mediates the cardioprotective effects of gene

therapy with PKG-I alpha. Basic Res Cardiol 110:42-54. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s00395-015-0500-y

- 13. Donnarumma E, Ali MJ, Rushing AM, Scarborough AL, Bradley JM, Organ CL, Islam KN, Polhemus DJ, Evangelista S, Cirino G, Jenkins JS, Patel RAG, Lefer DJ, Goodchild TT (2016) Zofenopril protects against myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury by increasing nitric oxide and hydrogen sulfide bioavailability. J Am Heart Assoc 5:e003531-e003549. https://doi.org/10.1161/ jaha.116.003531
- 14. Donnarumma E, Trivedi RK, Lefer DJ (2017) Protective actions of   H 2 S in acute myocardial infarction and heart failure. Compr Physiol 7:583-602. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c160023
- 15. Durrant D, Mauro AG, Raleigh JV, Das A, He J, Nguyen K, Toldo S, Abbate A, Salloum FN (2014) MAVS mediates protection against myocardial ischemic injury with hydrogen sulfide. Circ Res 115:E87. https://doi.org/10.1161/RES.0000000000000038
- 16. Eitel I, Stiermaier T, Rommel KP, Fuernau G, Sandri M, Mangner N, Linke A, Erbs S, Lurz P, Boudriot E, Mende M, Desch S, Schuler G, Thiele H (2015) Cardioprotection by combined intrahospital remote ischaemic preconditioning and postconditioning in ST-elevation myocardial infarction: the randomized LIPSIA CONDITIONING trial. Eur Heart J 36:3049-3057. https://doi. org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehv463
- 17. Elrod JW, Calvert JW, Morrison J, Doeller JE, Kraus DW, Tao L, Jiao X, Scalia R, Kiss L, Szabo C, Kimura H, Chow CW, Lefer DJ (2007) Hydrogen sulfide attenuates myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury by preservation of mitochondrial function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:15560-15565. https://doi.org/10.1073/ pnas.0705891104
- 18. Ferdinandy P, Hausenloy DJ, Heusch G, Baxter GF, Schulz R (2014) Interaction of risk factors, comorbidities, and comedications with ischemia/reperfusion injury and cardioprotection by preconditioning, postconditioning, and remote conditioning. Pharmacol Rev 66:1142-1174. https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.113.008300
- 19. Gao Y, Yao XY, Zhang YN, Li WM, Kang K, Sun L, Sun XY (2011) The protective role of hydrogen sulfide in myocardial ischemia-reperfusion-induced injury in diabetic rats. Int J Cardiol 152:177-183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2010.07.012
- 20. Hausenloy DJ, Barrabes JA, Botker HE, Davidson SM, Di Lisa F, Downey J, Engstrom T, Ferdinandy P, Carbrera-Fuentes HA, Heusch G, Ibanez B, Iliodromitis EK, Inserte J, Jennings R, Kalia N, Kharbanda R, Lecour S, Marber M, Miura T, Ovize M, PerezPinzon MA, Piper HM, Przyklenk K, Schmidt MR, Redington A, Ruiz-Meana M, Vilahur G, Vinten-Johansen J, Yellon DM, Garcia-Dorado D (2016) Ischaemic conditioning and targeting reperfusion injury: a 30 year voyage of discovery. Basic Res Cardiol 111:70-94. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00395-016-0588-8
- 21. Hausenloy DJ, Botker HE, Engstrom T, Erlinge D, Heusch G, Ibanez B, Kloner RA, Ovize M, Yellon DM, Garcia-Dorado D (2017) Targeting reperfusion injury in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: trials and tribulations. Eur Heart J 38:935-941. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehw145
- 22. Hausenloy DJ, Garcia-Dorado D, Bøtker HE, Davidson SM, Downey J, Engel FB, Jennings R, Lecour S, Leor J, Madonna R, Ovize M, Perrino C, Prunier F, Schulz R, Sluijter JPG, Van Laake LW, Vinten-Johansen J, Yellon DM, Ytrehus K, Heusch G, Ferdinandy P (2017) Novel targets and future strategies for acute cardioprotection: position paper of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Cellular Biology of the Heart. Cardiovasc Res 113:564-585. https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvx049
- 23. Heusch G (2017) Critical issues for the translation of cardioprotection. Circ Res 120:1477-1486. https://doi.org/10.1161/ CIRCRESAHA.117.310820
- 24. Heusch G (2015) Molecular basis of cardioprotection: signal transduction in ischemic pre-, post-, and remote conditioning. Circ Res 116:674-699. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.305348

- 25. Heusch G, Gersh BJ (2017) The pathophysiology of acute myocardial infarction and strategies of protection beyond reperfusion: a continual challenge. Eur Heart J 38:774-784. https://doi. org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehw224
- 26. Holm S (1979) A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scand J Stat 6:65-70. https://doi.org/10.2307/4615733
- 27. Hooijmans CR, IntHout J, Ritskes-Hoitinga M, Rovers MM (2014) Meta-analyses of animal studies: an introduction of a valuable instrument to further improve healthcare. ILAR J 55:418-426. https://doi.org/10.1093/ilar/ilu042
- 28. Huang YE, Tang ZH, Xie W, Shen XT, Liu MH, Peng XP, Zhao ZZ, Nie DB, Liu LS, Jiang ZS (2012) Endogenous hydrogen sulfide mediates the cardioprotection induced by ischemic postconditioning in the early reperfusion phase. Exp Ther Med 4:1117-1123. https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2012.733
- 29. Jin HF, Wang Y, Wang XB, Sun Y, Tang CS, Du JB (2013) Sulfur dioxide preconditioning increases antioxidative capacity in rat with myocardial ischemia reperfusion (I/R) injury. Nitric Oxide 32:56-61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.niox.2013.04.008
- 30. Kang B, Li W, Xi W, Yi Y, Ciren Y, Shen H, Zhang Y, Jiang H, Xiao J, Wang Z (2017) Hydrogen sulfide protects cardiomyocytes against apoptosis in ischemia/reperfusion through mir-1-regulated histone deacetylase 4 pathway. Cell Physiol Biochem 41:10-21. https://doi.org/10.1159/000455816
- 31. Kang JM, Li Z, Organ CL, Park CM, Yang CT, Pacheco A, Wang DF, Lefer DJ, Xian M (2016) pH-controlled hydrogen sulfide release for myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Am Chem Soc 138:6336-6339. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.6b01373
- 32. Karwi QG, Bornbaum J, Boengler K, Torregrossa R, Whiteman M, Wood ME, Schulz R, Baxter GF (2017) AP39, a mitochondriatargeting hydrogen sulfide   (H S) donor, protects against myocar2 dial reperfusion injury independently of salvage kinase signalling. Br J Pharmacol 174:287-301. https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.13688
- 33. Karwi QG, Whiteman M, Wood ME, Torregrossa R, Baxter GF (2016)  Pharmacological  postconditioning  against  myocardial  infarction  with  a  slow-releasing  hydrogen  sulfide donor,  GYY4137. Pharmacol Res 111:442-451. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.phrs.2016.06.028
- 34. Kilkenny C, Browne W, Cuthill IC, Emerson M, Altman DG, Group NCRRGW (2010) Animal research: reporting in vivo experiments: the ARRIVE guidelines. Br J Pharmacol 160:15771579. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.00872.x
- 35. Lambert JP, Nicholson CK, Amin H, Amin S, Calvert JW (2014) Hydrogen sulfide provides cardioprotection against myocardial/ ischemia reperfusion injury in the diabetic state through the activation of the RISK pathway. Med Gas Res 4:20-31. https://doi. org/10.1186/s13618-014-0020-0
- 36. Li CY, Hu M, Wang Y, Lu H, Deng J, Yan XH (2015) Hydrogen sulfide preconditioning protects against myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury in rats through inhibition of endo/sarcoplasmic reticulum stress. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 8:7740-7751
- 37. Lim WY, Messow CM, Berry C (2012) Cyclosporin variably and inconsistently reduces infarct size in experimental models of reperfused myocardial infarction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Pharmacol 165:2034-2043. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01691.x
- 38. Lougiakis N, Papapetropoulos A, Gikas E, Toumpas S, Efentakis P, Wedmann R, Zoga A, Zhou ZM, Iliodromitis EK, Skaltsounis AL, Filipovic MR, Pouli N, Marakos P, Andreadou I (2016) Synthesis and pharmacological evaluation of novel adenine-hydrogen sulfide slow release hybrids designed as multitarget cardioprotective agents. J Med Chem 59:1776-1790. https://doi.org/10.1021/ acs.jmedchem.5b01223
- 39. Modis K, Ju Y, Ahmad A, Untereiner AA, Altaany Z, Wu L, Szabo C, Wang R (2016) S-sulfhydration of ATP synthase by

<!-- image -->

- hydrogen sulfide stimulates mitochondrial bioenergetics. Pharmacol Res 113:116-124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2016.08.023
- 40. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, Group P (2009) Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. J Clin Epidemiol 62:1006-1012. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2009.06.005
- 41. Murphy E, Ardehali H, Balaban RS, DiLisa F, Dorn GW 2nd, Kitsis RN, Otsu K, Ping P, Rizzuto R, Sack MN, Wallace D, Youle RJ, American Heart Association Council on Basic Cardiovascular Sciences CoCC, Council on Functional G, Translational B (2016) Mitochondrial function, biology, and role in disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Res 118:1960-1991. https://doi.org/10.1161/RES.0000000000000104
- 42. Murphy E, Steenbergen C (2007) Gender-based differences in mechanisms of protection in myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. Cardiovasc Res 75:478-486. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cardiores.2007.03.025
- 43. Murry CE, Jennings RB, Reimer KA (1986) Preconditioning with ischemia: a delay of lethal cell injury in ischemic myocardium. Circulation 74:1124-1136. https://doi.org/10.1161/01. CIR.74.5.1124
- 44. O'Connor D, Green S, Higgins JP (2008) Defining the review question and developing criteria for including studies. In: Higgins JP, Green S (eds) Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions: Cochrane book series. Wiley, Chichester, UK, pp 81-94
- 45. Osipov RM, Robich MP, Feng J, Liu Y, Clements RT, Glazer HP, Sodha NR, Szabo C, Bianchi C, Sellke FW (2009) Effect of hydrogen sulfide in a porcine model of myocardial ischemiareperfusion: comparison of different administration regimens and characterization of the cellular mechanisms of protection. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 54:287-297. https://doi.org/10.1097/ FJC.0b013e3181b2b72b
- 46. Peake BF, Nicholson CK, Lambert JP, Hood RL, Amin H, Amin S, Calvert JW (2013) Hydrogen sulfide preconditions the db/ db diabetic mouse heart against ischemia-reperfusion injury by activating Nrf2 signaling in an Erk-dependent manner. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 304:H1215-H1224. https://doi. org/10.1152/ajpheart.00796.2012
- 47. Pocock SJ, Gersh BJ (2014) Do current clinical trials meet society's needs? J Am Coll Cardiol 64:1615-1628. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jacc.2014.08.008
- 48. Polhemus DJ, Li Z, Pattillo CB, Gojon G Sr, Gojon G Jr, Giordano T, Krum H (2015) A novel hydrogen sulfide prodrug, SG1002, promotes hydrogen sulfide and nitric oxide bioavailability in heart failure patients. Cardiovasc Ther 33:216-226. https://doi.org/10.1111/1755-5922.12128
- 49. Predmore BL, Kondo K, Bhushan S, Zlatopolsky MA, King AL, Aragon JP, Grinsfelder DB, Condit ME, Lefer DJ (2012) The polysulfide diallyl trisulfide protects the ischemic myocardium by preservation of endogenous hydrogen sulfide and increasing nitric oxide bioavailability. Am J Physiol Heart Circ  Physiol  302:H2410-H2418.  https://doi.org/10.1152/ ajpheart.00044.2012
- 50. Rossello X, Yellon DM (2016) A critical review on the translational  journey  of  cardioprotective  therapies!  Int  J  Cardiol 220:176-184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.06.131
- 51. Salloum FN, Chau VQ, Hoke NN, Abbate A, Varma A, Ockaili RA, Toldo S, Kukreja RC (2009) Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor, tadalafil, protects against myocardial ischemia/reperfusion through protein-kinase G-dependent generation of hydrogen sulfide. Circ 120:S31-S36. https://doi.org/10.1161/circulationaha.108.843979
- 52. Salloum FN, Das A, Samidurai A, Hoke NN, Chau VQ, Ockaili RA, Stasch JP, Kukreja RC (2012) Cinaciguat, a novel activator of soluble guanylate cyclase, protects against ischemia/reperfusion

<!-- image -->

- injury: role of hydrogen sulfide. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 302:H1347-H1354. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00544.2011
- 53. Salloum FN, Sturz GR, Yin C, Rehman S, Hoke NN, Kukreja RC, Xi L (2015) Beetroot juice reduces infarct size and improves cardiac function following ischemia-reperfusion injury: possible involvement of endogenous   H S. Exp Biol Med 240:669-681. 2 https://doi.org/10.1177/1535370214558024
- 54. Sivarajah A, Collino M, Yasin M, Benetti E, Gallicchio M, Mazzon E, Cuzzocrea S, Fantozzi R, Thiemermann C (2009) Antiapoptotic and anti-inflammatory effects of hydrogen sulfide in a rat model of regional myocardial I/R. Shock 31:267-274. https:// doi.org/10.1097/SHK.0b013e318180ff89
- 55. Sivarajah A, McDonald M, Thiemermann C (2006) Endogenous hydrogen sulfide contributes to the cardioprotective effects of pre-conditioning with endotoxin, but not ischemia, in the rat. Acta Pharmacol Sin 27:161-162. https://doi.org/10.1097/01. shk.0000225722.56681.64
- 56. Snijder PM, de Boer RA, Bos EM, van den Born JC, Ruifrok WPT, Vreeswijk-Baudoin I, van Dijk M, Hillebrands JL, Leuvenink HGD, van Goor H (2013) Gaseous hydrogen sulfide protects  against  myocardial  ischemia-reperfusion  injury  in mice partially independent from hypometabolism. PLoS One 8:e63291-e63302. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0063291
- 57. Testai L, Marino A, Piano I, Brancaleone V, Tomita K, Di Cesare Mannelli L, Martelli A, Citi V, Breschi MC, Levi R, Gargini C, Bucci M, Cirino G, Ghelardini C, Calderone V (2016) The novel   H 2 S-donor 4-carboxyphenyl isothiocyanate promotes cardioprotective effects against ischemia/reperfusion injury through activation of mitoKATP channels and reduction of oxidative stress. Pharmacol Res 113:290-299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. phrs.2016.09.006
- 58. Toldo S, Das A, Mezzaroma E, Chau VQ, Marchetti C, Durrant D, Samidurai A, Van Tassell BW, Yin C, Ockaili RA, Vigneshwar N, Mukhopadhyay ND, Kukreja RC, Abbate A, Salloum FN (2014) Induction of microRNA-21 with exogenous hydrogen sulfide attenuates myocardial ischemic and inflammatory injury in mice. Circ Cardiovasc Genet 7:311-320. https://doi.org/10.1161/ circgenetics.113.000381
- 59. Vesterinen HM, Sena ES, Egan KJ, Hirst TC, Churolov L, Currie GL, Antonic A, Howells DW, Macleod MR (2014) Meta-analysis of data from animal studies: a practical guide. J Neurosci Methods 221:92-102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.09.010
- 60. Wallace JL, Wang R (2015) Hydrogen sulfide-based therapeutics: exploiting a unique but ubiquitous gasotransmitter. Nat Rev Drug Discov 14:329-345. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd4433
- 61. Warenycia  MW,  Goodwin  LR,  Benishin  CG,  Reiffenstein RJ, Francom DM, Taylor JD, Dieken FP (1989) Acute hydrogen  sulfide  poisoning.  Demonstration  of  selective uptake of sulfide by the brainstem by measurement of brain sulfide  levels.  Biochem  Pharmacol  38:973-981.  https://doi. org/10.1016/0006-2952(89)90288-8
- 62. Wu D, Li M, Tian W, Wang S, Cui L, Li H, Wang H, Ji A, Li Y (2017) Hydrogen sulfide acts as a double-edged sword in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells through EGFR/ERK/MMP-2 and PTEN/AKT signaling pathways. Sci Rep 7:5134-5148. https:// doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-05457-z
- 63. Xie H, Xu Q, Jia J, Ao G, Sun Y, Hu L, Alkayed NJ, Wang C, Cheng J (2015) Hydrogen sulfide protects against myocardial ischemia and reperfusion injury by activating AMP-activated protein kinase to restore autophagic flux. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 458:632-638. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.017
- 64. Yang XM, Cui L, Alhammouri A, Downey JM, Cohen MV (2013) Triple therapy greatly increases myocardial salvage during ischemia/reperfusion in the in situ rat heart. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 27:403-412. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10557-013-6474-9

- 65. Yao LL, Huang XW, Wang YG, Cao YX, Zhang CC, Zhu YC (2010) Hydrogen sulfide protects cardiomyocytes from hypoxia/ reoxygenation-induced apoptosis by preventing GSK-3betadependent opening of mPTP. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 298:H1310-H1319. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00339.2009
- 66. Yao X, Tan G, He C, Gao Y, Pan S, Jiang H, Zhang Y, Sun X (2012) Hydrogen sulfide protects cardiomyocytes from myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury by enhancing phosphorylation of apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment domain. Tohoku J Exp Med 226:275-285. https://doi.org/10.1620/tjem.226.275
- 67. Yong QC, Lee SW, Foo CS, Neo KL, Chen X, Bian JS (2008) Endogenous hydrogen sulphide mediates the cardioprotection induced by ischemic postconditioning. Am J Physiol Heart Circ  Physiol  295:H1330-H1340.  https://doi.org/10.1152/ ajpheart.00244.2008
- 68. Zhao Y, Bhushan S, Yang CT, Otsuka H, Stein JD, Pacheco A, Peng B, Devarie-Baez NO, Aguilar HC, Lefer DJ, Xian M (2013)

- Controllable hydrogen sulfide donors and their activity against myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. ACS Chem Biol 8:12831290. https://doi.org/10.1021/cb400090d
- 69. Zhao Y, Yang CT, Organ C, Li Z, Bhushan S, Otsuka H, Pacheco A, Kang JM, Aguilar HC, Lefer DJ, Xian M (2015) Design, synthesis, and cardioprotective effects of n -mercapto-based hydrogen sulfide donors. J Med Chem 58:7501-7511. https://doi. org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01033
- 70. Zhu XY, Wang Y, Ding YL, Deng J, Yan XH (2016) Cardioprotection by   H 2 S postconditioning engages the inhibition of endoplasmic reticulum stress. Int J Clin Exp Med 9:17529-17538
- 71. Zhuo Y, Chen PF, Zhang AZ, Zhong H, Chen CQ, Zhu YZ (2009) Cardioprotective effect of hydrogen sulfide in ischemic reperfusion experimental rats and its influence on expression of survivin gene. Biol Pharm Bull 32:1406-1410. https://doi.org/10.1248/ bpb.32.1406