Mechanisms of IFN-  Production by Neutrophils and Its Function during γ S. pneumoniae Pneumonia

John C. Gomez *† || , Mitsuhiro Yamada *† || , Jessica R. Martin *† || , Hong Dang † || , W. June Brickey , ‡ Wolfgang Bergmeier , Mary C. Dinauer , and Claire M. Doerschuk ‡ § *† ||

* Center for Airways Disease, Department of Medicine,  Cystic Fibrosis Center,  Marsico Lung † || Institute,  Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina, Chapel ‡ Hill, NC 27599,  Department of Pediatrics, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110 §

Address correspondence to:    Claire M. Doerschuk, M.D.

7011 Thurston Bowles, CB #7248 University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7248 Phone:  919 966-1782 Fax:  919 966-5178 Email:  cmd@med.unc.edu

Running title: Neutrophil IFN-γ production

Supported by:  AI067798 (WJB), HL 048160 (CMD), HL 052466 (CMD)

Contributions of Authors: Conception and design: JG, MY, HD, MD, CD Acquisition, analysis and interpretation: JG, MY, JM, HD, WJB, WB, MD, CD Drafting the manuscript for important intellectual content: JG, MY, HD, WB, MD, CD

## Abstract

Bacterial pneumonia is a common public health problem associated with significant mortality, morbidity and cost. Neutrophils are usually the earliest leukocytes to respond to bacteria in the lungs. Neutrophils rapidly sequester in the pulmonary microvasculature and migrate into the lung parenchyma and alveolar spaces, where they perform numerous effector functions for host defense. Previous studies showed that migrated neutrophils produce IFN-γ early during pneumonia induced by S. pneumoniae, and that early production of IFN-γ regulates bacterial clearance. IFN-γ production by neutrophils requires Rac2, Hck/Lyn/Fgr Src family tyrosine kinases, and NADPH oxidase. Our current studies examined the mechanisms that regulate IFNγ production by lung neutrophils during acute S. pneumoniae pneumonia in mice and its function. We demonstrate that IFN-γ production by neutrophils is a tightly regulated process, which surprisingly does not require IL-12. The adaptor molecule MyD88 is critical for IFN-γ production by neutrophils. The guanine nucleotide exchange factor CalDAG-GEFI modulates IFN-γ production. The CD11/18 complex, CD44, TLR2, TLR4, TRIF, and Nrf2 are not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils. The recently described neutrophil-dendritic cell hybrid cell, identified by its expression of both Ly6G and CD11c, is present at low numbers in pneumonic lungs and is not a source of IFN-γ.  IFN-γ produced by neutrophils early during acute S. pneumoniae pneumonia induces transcription of target genes in the lungs, which are critical for host defense.  These studies underline the complexity of the neutrophil responses during pneumonia, both in the acute inflammatory response and in subsequent resolution or initiation of immune responses.

Keywords:  pneumonia, neutrophils, interferon-gamma, Type II interferon, MyD88, IL-12, NADPH oxidase, S. pneumoniae , mice

## Introduction

Bacterial pneumonia is a common public health problem with considerable morbidity and mortality (1). It is one of the most common precursors to the development of acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Neutrophils are usually the earliest leukocyte to respond to bacteria in the lungs. Neutrophils rapidly sequester in the pulmonary microvasculature and migrate into the lung parenchyma and alveolar spaces, where they perform numerous effector functions.

Recent studies have shown that neutrophils can no longer be considered simply carriers of the machinery to produce superoxide and other reactive oxygen species and proteases, but rather that they are very capable of transcribing and translating proteins in a regulated manner (2). The mediators that they produce depend on the inflammatory stimulus and the lung environment. For example, our recent studies have shown that migrated neutrophils produce IFN-γ during pneumonia induced by S. pneumoniae and S. aureus, but not in pneumonias caused by E. coli or P. aeruginosa , when assessed by flow cytometry, mass spectroscopy or ELISA (3). At this time early in the evolution of pneumonias, 98% of the IFN-γ-expressing cells are neutrophils (3). This IFN-γ is important in host defense, because at 24 hours after intratracheal instillation of S. pneumoniae, bacterial clearance was impaired in mice deficient in IFN-γ (3). Our studies showed that one mechanism through which IFN-γ regulates bacterial clearance is by regulating the production of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) (3).

Very little is understood about the pathways through which IFN-γ is induced in neutrophils. The cytokine IL-12 is produced by dendritic cells, neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages and induces inflammatory processes, including IFN-γ production by lymphocytes and NK cells (4). Several studies have shown that IL-12 can also induce IFN-γ production by macrophages and dendritic cells (5-7). A critical mediator of IL-12 signaling is STAT4, which is phosphorylated upon IL-12 binding to its receptor (8, 9). Phosphorylated STAT4 then translocates to the nucleus and binds to target genes to regulate their transcription. Our initial studies tested the hypothesis that IL-12 is required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils through a STAT4-dependent pathway. Since the studies presented in this manuscript show no role for IL-12 in IFN-γ production by neutrophils, other hypotheses were pursued.

Our previous studies provided clues about important pathways for neutrophil production of IFNγ. Three nonreceptor Src family kinases expressed on neutrophils (Hck, Fgr and Lyn), the small GTPase Rac2, and the gp91 phox (Nox2) component of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase are required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils during S. pneumoniae pneumonia (3). A signaling pathway in which the Src family kinases activate Rac2 and leads to assembly and activation of the NADPH oxidase has been described (10). The NADPH oxidase complex catalyzes the production of superoxide from oxygen, which leads to a cascade of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and potentially to oxidative stress (11). This stress activates the transcription factor Nrf2, which switches on cytoprotective pathways by regulating transcription of antioxidant and detoxifying genes (12, 13). Recent reports have also demonstrated a requirement for Nrf2 in regulating the innate immune response during infection or injury (14-20). Whether the observed role of NADPH oxidase in IFN-γ production is due to Nrf2 target genes regulating IFN-γ is an important question we address. Furthermore, these members of the Src family kinases, Rac2 and NADPH oxidase are each downstream of signaling induced by the CD11/CD18 leukocyte adhesion complex (10, 21-24).  The glycoprotein CD44, a major receptor for hyaluronan and other extracellular matrix components, is also important for activating β2 integrins (25). The studies described herein also seek to determine whether CD11/CD18 and CD44 are required for the production of IFN-γ by neutrophils.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) initiate signaling cascades and induce production of mediators in response to pathogens. Of particular interest for this study are TLR2, which recognizes whole S. pneumoniae and peptidoglycan from the cell wall of Gram positive organisms (26, 27), and TLR4, best known for recognizing LPS but also capable of recognizing other ligands including the pneumococcal pore-forming toxin pneumolysin (28). TLR2 also appears to contribute to the host response to purified pneumolysin in vivo (29). The initial signaling immediately downstream of TLRs is mediated by the TIR-domain containing adaptors, MyD88 and TRIF (30). MyD88 mediates signaling downstream of all TLRs except TLR3 and in some cases TLR4, whereas TRIF mediates MyD88-independent signaling downstream of TLR4 and TLR3 (31-33). MyD88 regulates neutrophil recruitment to the lung during bacterial pneumonia (34, 35). TRIF is critical for host responses in pneumonias caused by the Gram-negative organisms E. coli (36), K. pneumoniae (37) and P. aeruginosa (38).

Our studies thus pursued questions about the mechanisms through which IFN-γ expression in neutrophils is regulated during S. pneumoniae pneumonia. Since these studies show that IL-12 is not a regulator of IFN-γ expression, whereas nonreceptor Src tyrosine kinases, Rac2 and NADPH oxidase are required for IFN-γ production (3), subsequent studies tested hypotheses about what is downstream and upstream of these signaling molecules. These hypotheses tested the role of the oxidant stress-activated transcription factor Nrf2 in regulating IFN-γ production and of NADPH oxidase-generated ROS in regulating MAPK kinase.  A role for the CD11/CD18 adhesion complex (β2 leukocyte integrins) was postulated, since the complex is upstream of these signaling molecules and CD11b/CD18 is also a complement receptor (CR3), as well as a role for CD44. These studies also tested the hypothesis that the toll-like receptors TLR2 and 4 and the TLR downstream adaptor molecules MyD88 and TRIF are important regulatory molecules in IFN-γ production by neutrophils.

Materials and Methods (please see online supplement)

## Mice

Adult C57BL/6 wild type (WT) and mutant mice backcrossed for &gt; 10 generations were purchased or obtained from collaborators.  Age- and gender-matched mice were studied at 6-8 weeks of age.

All animal studies were performed in compliance with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.  Animal studies were reviewed and approved by our Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

## Bacterial pneumonia

Pneumonia was induced by intratracheal instillation of Streptococcus pneumoniae ( S. pneumoniae ; serotype 19, ATCC 49619) suspended in PBS into the left lung at a dose of 2.3 µl/g mouse body weight (see online supplement). .

Bone marrow chimeric mice were generated (online supplement).

Isolation of single lung cells, immunostaining to identify neutrophils and intracellular IFN-γ and flow cytometry data analysis were performed as previously described (3) and detailed in the online supplement

Isolation of neutrophils from single cell suspensions of mouse lungs was performed using biotin-anti-Ly6G and magnetic beads coated with anti-biotin (MACS beads, Miltenyi).

Gene expression profiling using Affymetrix arrays is described in the supplement.

## Results

Neutrophils, but not neutrophil-dendritic cell hybrids, produce IFN-γ during S. pneumoniae pneumonia.

S. pneumoniae caused a large increase in the number of neutrophils in the lung (Figure 1). Consistent with our previously published work (3), neutrophils in the pneumonic lung produced IFN-γ during pneumonia induced by S. pneumoniae (Figure 1) . The MFI of IFN-γ staining was significantly higher in neutrophils from mice given S. pneumoniae compared with that of neutrophils from mice given PBS, whether comparing all neutrophils (20 ± 2.3 vs. 2.1 ± 0.3, respectively) or neutrophils expressing IFN-γ (31 ± 1.1 vs. 16 ± 0.5).

Our published data show that T cells, NK cells, macrophages are not producing IFN-γ at 24 hours (3).  In fact, &gt; 98% of the IFN-γ expressing cells in lung digests are neutrophils, as marked by high expression levels of Ly6G.  Recent reports have indicated that CD11c expressing neutrophils arise during inflammation and may be important in bacterial clearance and antigen presentation by functioning as neutrophil-dendritic cell hybrids (39, 40). The number of lung cells co-expressing CD11c and Ly6G was greater in WT mice with S. pneumoniae pneumonia compared with those given PBS (4.0 ± 0.73 x 10  vs. 0.13 ± 0.04 x10 , n=4, p&lt;0.05 4 4 using t test). However, CD11c+ Ly6G+ cells constituted a minuscule proportion of cells in the lungs of S. pneumoniae and PBS-treated mice (0.08 ± 0.02% vs. 0.01 ± 0.0%, respectively), and a very low proportion of the IFN-γ+ cells expressed CD11c in mice with S. pneumoniae pneumonia (0.4 ± 0.3%).  These data indicate that CD11c+ neutrophils are not contributing to IFN-γ production during pneumonia.

## IL-12 is not required for IFN-γ production by lung neutrophils.

IL12a deficient mice lack the unique p35 subunit of IL-12 and express decreased levels of IFN-γ during infection with L. monocytogenes (41). The number of neutrophils that migrated into the lungs was similar in WT and IL12 deficient ( Il12a -/-) mice during 24 h S. pneumoniae pneumonia. The percentage of Ly6G negative cells that expressed IFN-γ was similarly low in WT and IL12 deficient mice (1.4 ± 0.3% vs. 1.1 ± 0.3%). In WT mice, over half the lung neutrophils expressed IFN-γ (Figure 2). Most importantly, the percentage of IFN-γ+ neutrophils was similar in WT and IL12a deficient mice when gating was based on either high expression (analysis 1) or moderate and high expression (analysis 2) (Figure 2A). The IFN-γ MFI and the distribution of intensity of IFN-γ staining was also not different between genotypes (Table 1). These data indicate that IL-12 is not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils.

IL-12 activates the transcription factor STAT4 which plays a critical role in IFN-γ production by lymphocytes and NK cells (8, 9). STAT4 is expressed in neutrophils from the lungs of mice given PBS or S. pneumoniae (Figure 2B). However, the phosphorylated form of STAT4 was not detected in these lung neutrophils using an antibody specific for STAT4 phosphorylated at tyrosine 693, or after immunoprecipitation of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins with an antiphosphotyrosine antibody (Figure 2C). Taken together, these studies suggest that IL12 and phosphorylation of STAT4 are not required for IFN-γ expression by neutrophils during S. pneumoniae pneumonia.

The leukocyte adhesion complex CD11/CD18 does not contribute to IFN-γ production. Our previous study demonstrated that production of IFN-γ by neutrophils during S. pneumoniae pneumonia required Rac2, the Src family kinases Hck/Fgr/Lyn and the gp91 phox component of

NADPH oxidase (3). Studies in the literature have demonstrated that these molecules are downstream of leukocyte integrin engagement in outside-in signaling pathways that modulate neutrophil adhesion, motility and activation (21, 22, 24, 42). To determine the role of adhesion molecules in IFN-γ production by neutrophils, mice deficient in leukocyte β2 integrins (the CD11/CD18 adhesion complex) were studied.

The leukocyte integrin CD11/CD18 expressed on neutrophils mediates adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells and to bacteria.  CD11a/CD18 (LFA-1) and CD11b/CD18 (Mac1 or CR3) can bind ICAM-1 expressed on endothelial and other cells. CD11b/CD18 can also bind to the complement fragment iC3b coating bacteria, extracellular matrix components, or other cells.

The role of the CD11a/CD18 and CD11b/CD18 in initiating IFN-γ expression was studied using mice deficient in either CD11a or CD11b. The total number of lung neutrophils in the pneumonic lung and the percentage of lung neutrophils that expressed both high and moderate levels of intracellular IFN-γ were not different among CD11a deficient ( Itgal -/-), CD11b deficient ( Itgam -/-) and WT mice (Table 2). The intensity of IFN-γ staining tended to be less in neutrophils from CD11a deficient mice, but this trend was not statistically significant (Table 1). These data indicate that CD11a/CD18 and CD11b/CD18 are not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils.

A direct comparison of WT and CD18 deficient neutrophils was made by reconstituting lethally irradiated WT mice with a mixture of WT and CD18 deficient bone marrow cells. The total number of lung neutrophils in chimeric mice was similar to the number of lung neutrophils in WT mice in the study addressing the roles of CD11a and CD11b (Table 2).  Interestingly, the proportion of neutrophils that are CD18 deficient is much higher in the lung than in the blood (99.5 ± 0.2% vs. 42 ± 4.8%), suggesting that CD18 deficient neutrophils are retained and may preferentially migrate in the lungs. The proportion of WT and CD18 deficient lung neutrophils that made IFN-γ was similar (Table 2), as was the level of IFN-γ expression. Taken together, these data indicate that CD11/CD18 adhesion complex is not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils. Thus, Rac2, the Src kinases Hck/Fgr/Lyn and NADPH oxidase mediate IFN-γ production through pathways that do not require ligation of β2 integrins on the neutrophil surface.

## Signaling through CalDAG-GEFI suppresses IFN-γ production.

CalDAG-GEFI is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor regulated by calcium.  It acts as an activator of β2 integrins in neutrophils and other integrins in platelets by activating Rap1. Surprisingly, the proportion of neutrophils expressing IFN-γ was significantly greater in mice deficient in CalDAG-GEFI deficient ( Rasgrp2 -/-) mice compared with WT mice (Figure 3) and the intensity of IFN-γ staining tended to be greater (Table 1). Thus signaling by CalDAG-GEFI appears to inhibit rather than induce IFN-γ expression by neutrophils.

## CD44 does not contribute to IFN-γ production.

CD44 is a major receptor for hyaluronan, as well as binding collagen and E-selectin. Several reports have indicated that CD44 ligation can upregulate the expression of ICAM-1 and modulate integrin-dependent adhesion (43-45), as well as activate β2 integrins on macrophages (25). However, the proportion of IFN-γ producing neutrophils in CD44 deficient mice and the intensity of IFN-γ expression were not different compared with those in WT mice, indicating that CD44 is not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils (Tables 1 and 2).

MyD88 but not TRIF regulate IFN-γ production.

Neutrophil numbers in the BALF were significantly less in MyD88 deficient ( Myd88 -/-) mice compared with WT mice (Table 3), consistent with the previously described role of MyD88 in regulating neutrophil recruitment during pulmonary inflammation (34, 35). The percentage of IFN-γ+ neutrophils and the intensity of IFN-γ staining in neutrophils in the BALF and lung tissue after lavage were significantly less in Myd88 -/-mice, indicating a role for MyD88 in mediating IFN-γ production by neutrophils (Table 3). The percentages of IFN-γ+ neutrophils and the intensity of IFN-γ staining of neutrophils in the BAL fluid and lung tissue after lavage were similar in WT and TRIF deficient ( Ticam1 -/-) mice (Table 3), indicating that TRIF is not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils during S. pneumoniae pneumonia. Interestingly, the total number of neutrophils in the BALF was significantly higher in the Ticam1 -/-mice; consequently, the number of IFN-γ+ cells in the BALF was significantly higher in Ticam1 -/-compared with WT mice.

## TLR2 and TLR4 do not contribute to IFN-γ production.

The role of TLR2 and TLR4 in IFN-γ production by neutrophils in S. pneumoniae pneumonia was examined using mice singly deficient in TLR2 ( Tlr2 -/-) or TLR4 ( Tlr4 -/-) or mice lacking both TLR2 and TLR4 ( Tlr2/4 -/-). Mice singly deficient in TLR2 or TLR4 were examined coincidently with WT and Tlr2/4 -/-mice. There was no significant difference in the proportion of IFN-γ+ neutrophils or in the total number of neutrophils in the lung when comparing all four genotypes (Table 4).

To examine the role of TLR2 and TLR4 in neutrophil recruitment to the lungs and IFN-γ production, neutrophils in the BALF and neutrophils remaining in the lung tissue after lavage were assessed. No significant differences were observed between WT and Tlr2/4 -/-mice in the number of neutrophils, in the proportion that expressed IFN-γ or the intensity of IFN-γ staining in the BALF and lung tissue after lavage (Table 5). These studies suggest that TLR2 and TLR4 are not required for either neutrophil recruitment to the lungs or IFN-γ production by neutrophils at 24 h during S. pneumoniae pneumonia.

## NADPH oxidase-generated oxidants are required for IFN-γ production but Nrf2 and its gene products are not .

Our previous work showed that the gp91 phox (Nox2, gene name Cybb ) component of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase is required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils (3). In neutrophils, NADPH oxidase is the main source of superoxide. Free radicals such as superoxide can cause oxidative stress, which in turn activates the cytoprotective transcription factor Nrf2. To determine whether Nrf2 is required for the production of IFN-γ by neutrophils, Nrf2 deficient ( Nfe2l2 -/-) mice were studied concurrently with WT and Nox2 deficient ( Cybb -/-) mice. The percentage of lung neutrophils that expressed intracellular IFN-γ was similar in WT mice and Nrf2 deficient mice (Figure 4), whether high expressors or high + moderate expressors are compared. The level of expression was also not different in these two genotypes, when compared using the MFI or the distribution of IFN-γ staining (Table 1). In contrast, neutrophils from Nox2 deficient mice expressed almost no IFN-γ (Figure 4), and the MFI was similarly low and not different from isotype controls (Table 1). The number of neutrophils in the lungs was not significantly different among WT, Nrf2 deficient and Nox2 deficient mice (Figure 4). These data indicate that Nrf2 and Nrf2-dependent target genes are not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils. NADPH oxidase may regulate IFN-γ production by modulating other oxidant-sensitive transcription factors and pathways.

To rule out the possibility that the defect in IFN-γ production observed in Nox2 deficient mice is due to differences in cell death, membrane integrity and apoptosis were assessed in lung neutrophils from WT and Nox2 deficient mice. Membrane integrity of lung neutrophils was

similarly high in WT and Nox2 deficient mice, as assessed with a fixable viability dye (94 ± 1% vs. 95 ± 0.2%, respectively, n=4). Notably, the percentage of viable neutrophils was similar between IFN-γ expressors and non-expressors in both genotypes. Cell viability as determined by 7-AAD exclusion was slightly less in WT compared with Nox2 deficient mice (90 ± 0.4% vs. 92 ± 0.6%, p&lt;0.05, t test). The proportion of neutrophils that bound Annexin V on their surface but excluded 7-AAD (consistent with membrane changes that occur early during apoptosis) was not significantly different between WT and Nox2 deficient mice (26 ± 3.8% vs. 34 ± 2.7%). Thus, differences in neutrophil viability are unlikely to be the reason for the lack of IFN-γ production in the absence of Nox2.

MAP kinase activity depends on phosphorylation of a few critical residues, which is regulated by kinases and phosphatases. ROS modulate the activity of MAP kinases by inhibiting phosphatases, resulting in sustained MAPK activation (46, 47). The levels of phosphorylated and total MAP kinases were determined in neutrophils isolated from the lungs of WT and Nox2 deficient mice given S. pneumoniae . There was no significant difference between WT and Nox2 deficient neutrophils in the levels of phosphorylated or total p38 and ERK MAPK, or in the level of total JNK (Figure 5). Notably, however, phosphorylated JNK was significantly greater in Nox2 deficient neutrophils compared with WT neutrophils by about 30% (Figure 5). Thus, ROS appear to be regulating JNK activity during S. pneumoniae pneumonia by limiting the amount of JNK in its phosphorylated active state.

## IFN-γ produced early during acute S. pneumoniae pneumonia regulates gene transcription in the lungs

To determine the effect of neutrophil IFN-γ on host defense, Ifng -/-mice were lethally irradiated and reconstituted with either WT or Ifng -/-BM.  They were studied after 3-4 weeks, when virtually all neutrophils are donor-derived.  Gene expression in lungs from these mice was profiled at 24 hours after intratracheal administration of PBS (control) or a low or high dose of S. pneumoniae .  In Ifng -/-mice given PBS, no genes were differentially expressed in mice reconstituted with WT compared to Ifng -/-BM, using standard filtering criteria (FDR adjusted p≤0.05, fold change ≥ 2).  Administration of a high dose of S. pneumoniae resulted in differential expression of 3013 and 2667 transcripts in mice reconstituted with WT or Ifng -/-cells, respectively; and administration of a low dose of S. pneumoniae induced 2577 and 2436 transcripts in mice reconstituted with WT or Ifng -/-BM cells, respectively (Table 6a).  Transcripts that were uniquely changed by S. pneumoniae in Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with WT BM compared to Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with Ifng -/-BM were identified (Table 6a).  However, a number of these unique transcripts were close to the statistical cutoff of 2.0 fold change, so that the ratio of the fold change in WT BM compared to the fold change in Ifng -/-BM was often close to one.  When this ratio was calculated for all genes counted in Table 6a, far fewer had a ratio greater than 1.5 (Table 6b).  There were 22 genes in both low and high dose pneumonias that showed a ratio of over 1.5 (i.e., were 50% greater in WT BM compared to Ifng -/-BM), and these transcripts are listed in Table E1.   Eight of these genes are known to be IFN-γ regulated (bold font).

IFN-γ mRNA was barely detectable in all mice given PBS.  In the mice reconstituted with WT BM, IFN-γ expression was up regulated 10 and 9.6 fold during high and low dose pneumonia, respectively.  The Ifng -/-mice have a stop codon in exon 2 of the Ifng gene.  However, variable length mRNA is produced that is recognized by the probes that target the Ifng gene.  Expression of the mutant Ifng mRNA in mice reconstituted with Ifng -/-BM was up regulated 1.8 fold and 2.1 fold at high and low dose pneumonia, respectively, and these changes were significantly less compared with those observed in mice with WT BM (adjusted p &lt;0.001, ANOVA).  This mRNA

appears unstable, since less was produced, but a stop codon in exon 2 would not be expected to have any impact on the promoter region's function.

There were 22 transcripts whose expression was at least 2-fold greater in WT BM-reconstituted mice compared with Ifng -/-BM-reconstituted mice during both low- and high-dose pneumonia (Table 7).  Except for Ciita , Pydc3 and GM22079 , the expression of the remaining 19 transcripts was increased during high dose S. pneumoniae pneumonia compared with PBS in mice reconstituted with Ifng -/-BM, indicating that the effect of IFN-γ is partial. Ciita expression was down regulated during pneumonia in the mice reconstituted with Ifng -/-BM cells, and Pydc3 and GM22079 were unchanged, suggesting that IFN-γ is absolutely required for their up regulation. Of the 22 differentially expressed transcripts, 18 have been previously identified in the literature as IFN-γ inducible genes, as curated in NCBI Gene and the Interferome database (48) (Table 7, bold font).  The expression of an additional 16 genes increased 1.5 to 2.0-fold in WT BMreconstituted mice compared with Ifng -/-BM-reconstituted mice during both low- and high-dose S. pneumoniae pneumonia, and 10 of these are known to be regulated by IFN-γ (Table E2).

Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) using gene ontology (GO) sets showed that genes involved in IFN-γ signaling and other immune response pathways were highly statistically enriched in the lungs of mice reconstituted with WT cells compared with those reconstituted with Ifng -/-cells (Table 8).  The IFN-γ inducible genes that accounted for the enrichment score in two GO sets focused on IFN-γ-induced responses (GO:0034341 and GO:0071346, Table 8) are shown in Table S3.  Nine of the genes in Table E2 were also identified in Table 7 or E1 (Ciita, Gbp10, Gbp4, Gbp5, Irf1, Irgm2, Nlrc5, Socs1, and Tgtp1).

STAT1 is downstream of the IFN-γ receptor and mediates most effects of IFN-γ.  STAT1 is activated during S. pneumoniae pneumonia, as demonstrated by GSEA showing statistically significant enrichment of genes involved in tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1 protein (GO:0042508 and GO:0042510).  Furthermore, STAT1 binding sites are present upstream to the transcription start site of all genes identified in Tables 7, E2 and E3 (49, 50).

Taken together, these data indicate that neutrophil-derived IFN-γ regulates gene expression in the lung during S. pneumoniae pneumonia and thus shapes the host response to bacteria in the lungs, the resolution of inflammation and the initiation of the immune response.

## Discussion

Our previous studies demonstrated that neutrophils recruited to the lungs in response to S. pneumoniae produce IFN-γ and that this IFN-γ appears to contribute to host defense (3).  The studies presented here sought to determine the signaling pathways through which this IFN-γ is produced by neutrophils and the mechanisms through which this IFN-γ impacts on host defense and innate immunity.

A growing body of work has shown that neutrophils are capable of producing cytokines and other mediators during inflammation (2).  IFN-γ production by neutrophils in the lung has been documented in response to Nocardia asteroides (51) or Saccharopolyspora rectivirgula , (52). Neutrophils also make IFN-γ during inflammation in other tissues, including in the spleen during infection with Salmonella (53) or Listeria monocytogenes (54), during early graft loss of pancreatic islet transplants (55), in response to Francisella tularensis live vaccine strain (56) and in the kidney early in renal ischemia-reperfusion injury (57). These reports suggest that IFNγ production by neutrophils early during infection or injury may be more widespread than generally appreciated.

This rapidly produced IFN-γ appears to be almost entirely from neutrophils.  At the time point of 24 h, neutrophils account for &gt; 98% of the IFN-γ production, and none is produced by T-cells, NK cells, macrophages or neutrophil-dendritic cell hybrids.  IL-12 is not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils.  IL-12-independent IFN-γ production has been suggested to occur even in lymphocytes.  For example, lymphocytes from IL12a deficient mice are still able to produce low levels of IFN-γ (41, 58).  IL-12-independent IFN-γ production could occur through IL-15 and/or IL-18.  IL-18 is produced by macrophages and dendritic and other cells, and it can induce IFN-γ production by T lymphocytes and NK cells in combination with IL-12 or other factors in the absence of IL-12 (59-61). Neutrophils from the lungs of mice exposed to S. rectivirgula produced IFN-γ when cultured in vitro with IL-12 and IL-18 or with IL-18 and IL-15, but not when cultured with any cytokine alone (62). Purified human peripheral blood neutrophils cultured with IL-12 produced a small amount of IFN-γ, and IFN-γ levels were augmented by the addition of TNF (63). Whether IL-18, IL-15, TNF or other cytokines induce IL-12-independent IFN-γ production by neutrophils in response to S. pneumoniae in vivo has not been determined. However, S. pneumoniae does induce a small but significant increase in both IL-15 and IL-18 mRNAs in the pneumonic lung.

Consistent with the finding that IL12 is not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils, STAT4 phosphorylation was not detected in lung neutrophils. In T lymphocytes and NK cells, the T-box transcription factors T-bet and Eomes regulate IFN-γ production (64, 65). T-bet has been implicated in IFN-γ production by T helper cells independent of IL-12 (66). HoweverT-bet is expressed at almost undetectable levels and Eomes is not significantly expressed in lung neutrophils from mice given PBS or S. pneumoniae (unpublished data). These findings suggest that IFN-γ gene transcription in neutrophils may be regulated through pathways distinct from those in other cell types.

Our data indicate that CalDAG-GEFI inhibits IFN-γ expression. In neutrophils, CalDAG-GEFI is critical for integrin activation by activating the small GTPase Rap1 downstream of G proteincoupled receptor signaling (71) or rolling on E-selectin (72). CalDAG-GEFI  can mediate neutrophil chemotaxis independent of integrins by regulating the actin cytoskeleton (73). The role of Rap1 in inducing IFN-γ is likely to be complex due to its many functions in neutrophils, endothelial cells and other cells (74). Whether CalDAG-GEFI regulates NADPH oxidase or any of the other signaling molecules required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils apart from its role in Rap1 or integrin activation has not been demonstrated to our knowledge.

MyD88 was important in both neutrophil recruitment and IFN-γ expression, but neither TLR2 nor TLR4 were required. These results suggest that redundant pathways for recognizing S. pneumoniae exist, and that other TLRs and/or pattern recognition receptors upstream of MyD88 are sufficient to drive IFN-γ production. Notably, the defect in IFN-γ production in MyD88 deficient mice is not as large as that observed in Nox2 deficient mice, suggesting that other pattern recognition receptors that do not signal through MyD88 may be important in the recognition of and response to S. pneumoniae . Other pattern recognition receptors have been shown to play important roles in host defense against this organism, including TLR9 (67, 68), NLRP3 (69, 70), NOD2 (71) and DAI (72). Pore formation by pneumolysin may enable bacterial components to enter host cells, thereby facilitating recognition of bacterial components by intracellular PRRs. These studies do not address whether MyD88 in neutrophils or in other cell types, such as alveolar and bronchial epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages, is controlling IFN-γ production by neutrophils.

NADPH oxidase is required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils, but not Nrf2, a transcription factor that is activated by oxidative stress. These results suggest that NADPH oxidase may regulate IFN-γ production by modulating activation of other oxidant-sensitive transcription factors such as AP-1 and NF-κB and/or by regulating phosphatase activity.  In other cell types, oxidants have been shown to inhibit phosphatases, but our data show that JNK phosphorylation is greater in Nox2 deficient neutrophils.  In contrast, phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and ERK is similar in WT and Nox2 deficient neutrophils.  Whether the observed increase in JNK phosphorylation is the mechanism through which IFN-γ production is inhibited in Nox2 deficient mice remains to be determined.  Neutrophils may have evolved complex mechanisms to regulate oxidant-responsive pathways as befits a cell that can generate large amounts of oxidants rapidly.

IFN-γ is important for host defense through its ability to activate neutrophils and other innate immune cells. For example, IFN-γ was required for timely clearance of S. pneumoniae and for the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (3). Mice deficient in IFN-γ have decrements in the production of iNOS, also important for bactericidal activity.  Moreover, this IFN-γ may shape the subsequent response by lymphocytes that migrate into the site of infection or injury after neutrophils.  For example, Cxcl11 expression at 24 h of pneumonia requires IFN-γ production (unpublished data).  Cxcl11 is the ligand for Cxcr3, which is expressed on CD4+ Th1 and CD8+ cytotoxic lymphocytes, and Cxcl11 regulates migration of Th1 T cells into sites of inflammation (73).

The mechanisms through which the IFN-γ produced within 24 h after instillation of S. pneumoniae contributes to host defense was evaluated by gene profiling of lungs from Ifng -/-mice with either Ifng -/-or WT bone marrow. S. pneumoniae induces robust gene expression in the lungs, and a significant proportion of these induced genes are regulated by IFN-γ.  Many of the genes identified in our analysis as IFN-γ regulated genes are known IFN-γ targets that are critical players in immune response (including Ciita , Cxcl9 , Ido1 , Irf1 , and Socs1 ).  Regulation of expression of certain genes by IFN-γ may be direct, as in transcriptional regulation of target genes through the IFN-γ receptor and downstream STAT1 signaling, or indirect, for example by regulating recruitment of certain cell types.  Thus, by producing IFN-γ, neutrophils can drive many processes in the host response to bacteria in the lungs.

In summary, these studies show that at 24 h after instillation of S. pneumoniae , neutrophils, but not neutrophil-dendritic cell hybrids, produced IFN-γ. No role for IL-12 was found for this process in neutrophils, in striking contrast to its critical role in IFN-γ production by T lymphocytes and NK cells (Figure 6). This IL-12-independent IFN-γ production is nearly abolished in Nox2 deficient mice, suggesting a role for oxidants in IFN-γ expression (3). However, Nrf2, a major transcription factor activated by oxidative stress, is not required for IFNγ production. These NADPH oxidase-generated oxidants may be acting through limiting JNK phosphorylation.  Building on our previous work showing that Src family tyrosine kinases, Rac2 and NADPH oxidase are required for IFN-γ production, our studies tested the role of the CD11/CD18 adhesion complex and CD44, which network with these signaling molecules. The data show CD11/CD18 adhesion complex and CD44 are not required.  The pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs) TLR2 and TLR4, either singly or in combination, are also not required, but the TLR adaptor molecule MyD88 is required for full expression of IFN-γ by neutrophils. Deficiency of TRIF, the other TLR adaptor protein, induced an increase in neutrophils and thus an increase in the total number of IFN-γ+ neutrophils, but TRIF is not required in IFN-γ production itself.  Thus, the intracellular signaling pathway (s) that leads to IFN-γ transcription includes MyD88, Src family tyrosine kinases, Rac2 and NADPH oxidasegenerated ROS and is negatively regulated by CalDAG-GEFI.   Neutrophils are the only cells in

the lung making IFN-γ during 24 hour S. pneumoniae pneumonia, and this IFN-γ is critical for the expression of many genes known to regulate macrophage activation, immune cell recruitment, leukocyte activation, cell killing and other aspects of innate and specific immunity. These studies underline the complexity and the importance of the neutrophil responses in host defense, both in the acute inflammatory response and in subsequent resolution or initiation of innate and specific immune responses. IFN-γ production by neutrophils during pneumonia induced by S. pneumoniae is a tightly regulated process that likely involves interactions between multiple signaling pathways.  Understanding these mechanisms may have important implications for treatment of infections and inflammatory diseases.

## Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Elizabeth A. Duncan, Eric Pearlman, Casey Weaver, Michael J. Vernon and Wanda K. O'Neal for their expert advice and many helpful discussions.  Flow cytometry was performed at the UNC Flow Cytometry Core Facility, which is supported in part by an NCI Center Core Support Grant (P30CA016086) to the UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center.  Gene expression profiling was performed at the UNC Functional Genomics Core Facility.

## Figure legends

Figure 1. Lung neutrophils produce IFN-γ during S. pneumoniae pneumonia. A. Dot plots show Ly6G and IFN-γ expression of lung cells from WT mice given PBS or S. pneumoniae . Cells were gated to exclude debris and doublets. Neutrophils were identified by high expression of Ly6G.

- B. Representative histogram shows IFN-γ expression of neutrophils from the lungs of WT mice given PBS or S. pneumoniae .  The percentage of high IFN-γ expressors was determined by setting the threshold of staining above that seen with the isotype-matched antibody control, effectively excluding cells with dim or moderate staining. The percentage of cells expressing moderate or high IFN-γ was determined by creating gates based on scatter and staining characteristics, and setting the staining threshold with the negative staining controls at less than or equal to 2%.
- C. The total number of neutrophils in the left lung and the percentage of IFN-γ+ neutrophils in the lung in WT mice at 24 hours after intratracheal instillation of PBS or S. pneumoniae . Data are expressed as mean ± SEM; n=4. High expression:  the percentage of neutrophils with high expression, as calculated using Analysis 1, as described in the Methods. High + moderate:  the percentage of neutrophils that expressed either moderate or high levels of IFN-γ, as calculated using Analysis 2. *p &lt; 0.05 compared to PBS instillation.

Figure 2. IL-12 is not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils.

A. The total number of neutrophils in the left lung and the percentage of IFN-γ+ neutrophils in the lung were similar in WT and IL-12a deficient ( Il12a -/-) mice at 24 hours after intratracheal instillation of S. pneumoniae . Data are expressed as mean ± SEM; n=7 (WT) and n=8 ( Il12a -/-). *p &lt; 0.05 compared to WT mice.

- B. STAT4 is expressed by neutrophils but is not phosphorylated in neutrophils during S. pneumoniae pneumonia.  The phosphorylated form of STAT4 (pSTAT4) was not detected in neutrophils isolated from lungs of 2 WT mice 6 hours after intratracheal instillation of PBS or S. pneumoniae (SP). PBS- and SP-treated neutrophils expressed total STAT4. pSTAT4 was detected in isolated WT splenocytes incubated in the presence of media (Med), S. pneumoniae (SP), or phorbol ester (PMA).
- C. STAT4 in lung neutrophils is not immunoprecipitated by an antibody that recognizes phosphorylated tyrosine residues (PY20). Neutrophils were isolated from the lungs of WT mice 6 h after intratracheal administration of PBS or S . pneumoniae . The neutrophils were lysed, and immunoprecipitation with the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody was performed using standard procedures. S = supernatant (non-immunoprecipitated fraction); IP = immunoprecipitated fraction. The positive control was obtained from splenocytes treated with PMA for 4 hours.
- Figure 3. Deficiency of CalDAG-GEFI augments IFN-γ production by neutrophils. The percentage of lung neutrophils expressing IFN-γ is significantly higher in CalDAG GEFI deficient ( Rasgrp2 -/) mice compared with WT mice. Data are mean ± SEM from 4 separate experiments, n=10 (WT) or 8 (Rasgrp2 -/-). *p&lt;0.05 compared with WT mice (t test).

Figure 4. NADPH oxidase is required for IFN-γ production, but the redox-sensitive transcription factor Nrf2 is not. The total number of neutrophils and the percentage of IFN-γ neutrophils in the pneumonic lung in WT, Nrf2 deficient (Nfe2l2 -/-) and Nox2 (gp91 phox ) deficient (Cybb -/-) mice. Data are mean ± SEM (n=3-5). *p≤0.05 compared to the other groups (ANOVA with Tukey HSD post-hoc test). Similar results were obtained in a separate study.

Figure 5. Deficiency of Nox2 results in augmented phosphorylation of JNK and no change in phosphorylation of ERK or p38 MAP kinases in neutrophils.  The total amount of each MAP kinase was similar in the two genotypes.  Representative immunoblots showing protein levels of phosphorylated and total MAP kinases in lung neutrophils from WT and Nox2 deficient ( Cybb -/-) mice during S. pneumoniae pneumonia. Graphs show densitometric measurements in arbitrary units (AU, mean ± SEM, n=4-5 mice per genotype repeated in 2-3 separate experiments).*, p≤0.05 compared with WT (t test).

Figure 6. Postulated pathway regulating IFN-γ production by neutrophils.  Recognition of S. pneumoniae or its components by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) results in activation of the adaptor molecule MyD88, which we postulate in turn leads to activation of Src family kinases (SFK) Lyn/Fgr/Hck, the small GTPase Rac2, and NADPH oxidase.  Production of oxidants by NADPH oxidase leads to production of IFN-γ through a process that does not require the oxidant-sensitive transcription factor Nrf2.  IL-12 is not required for IFN-γ production by neutrophils.  The adaptor molecule TRIF and the leukocyte adhesion complex CD11/CD18 (including complement receptor 3) are also not required.  The small GTPase CalDAG-GEFI inhibits neutrophil IFN-γ production.  Neutrophil-derived IFN-γ is critical for the expression of many genes known to regulate macrophage activation, immune cell recruitment, leukocyte activation, cell killing and other aspects of innate and specific immunity.  X:  not required. Dotted arrow:  likely to include intervening steps.

Table 1. The level of IFN-γ expression by neutrophils from mice with targeted mutations in the indicated molecules compared with WT mice. The data show the median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of lung neutrophils and of IFN-γ expressing lung neutrophils in age- and gender-matched mutant and WT mice during 24 h S. pneumoniae pneumonia.  MFI was estimated as the median channel value for all events that meet the gating criteria after subtracting the signal of the respective isotype control.  Values are mean ±SEM.  *p≤0.05 compared to WT (t test or ANOVA with Scheffe post hoc test as appropriate).

| Molecule deficient in  deficient mice   | MFI of all neutrophils   | MFI of all neutrophils   | MFI of IFN-γ+ neutrophils   | MFI of IFN-γ+ neutrophils   |
|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                                         | Deficient                | WT                       | Deficient                   | WT                          |
| IL12a                                   | 15 ± 1.5                 | 16 ± 1.4                 | 32 ± 1.3                    | 33 ± 2.1                    |
| Nrf2                                    | 19 ± 1.8                 | 19 ± 1.7                 | 30 ± 2.5                    | 29 ± 2.2                    |
| gp91  phox                              | 2.3 ± 0.7*               | 19 ± 1.7                 | 13 ± 1.2*                   | 29 ± 2.2                    |
| CD11a                                   | 14 ± 2.0                 | 20 ± 1.3                 | 43 ± 2.0                    | 43 ± 0.7  29 ± 1.6          |
| CD11b                                   | 24 ± 4.1                 |                          | 44 ± 4.6                    | 43 ± 0.7  29 ± 1.6          |
| CD18 (Chimeric mice)                    | 15 ± 2.0                 | 16 ± 2.4                 | 27 ± 1.0                    |                             |
| CalDAG GEFI                             | 16 ± 2.3  ( p=0.05 )     | 9.9 ± 0.6                | 31 ± 2.2                    | 25 ± 1.0                    |
| CD44                                    | 8.9 ± 1.2                | 8.0 ± 1.0                | 31 ± 1.0                    | 33 ± 1.6                    |
| TLR2/4                                  | 11 ± 1.9                 | 13 ± 1.8                 | 31 ± 1.5                    | 32 ± 2.1                    |
| TLR2                                    | 11 ± 2.9                 | 13 ± 1.8                 | 32 ± 0.2                    | 32 ± 2.1                    |
| TLR4                                    | 14 ± 1.6                 | 13 ± 1.8                 | 34 ± 1.7                    | 32 ± 2.1                    |

Table 2. The CD11/CD18 adhesion complex and CD44 do not contribute to IFN-γ production. The number of lung neutrophils in the pneumonic lung and the percentage that express IFN-γ in mutant and age- and sex-matched WT mice during 24 h S. pneumoniae pneumonia are shown. Values are mean ± SE.  *p≤0.05 compared to WT (t test or ANOVA with Scheffe post hoc test as appropriate). Data are from at least two experiments.

| Molecule  deficient in  deficient  mice   | Number of neutrophils in  pneumonic lung (x 10 )  6   | Number of neutrophils in  pneumonic lung (x 10 )  6   | Percentage of  neutrophils expressing  IFN-γ   | Percentage of  neutrophils expressing  IFN-γ   | Percentage of  neutrophils expressing  moderate or high  levels of IFN-γ   | Percentage of  neutrophils expressing  moderate or high  levels of IFN-γ   |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                           | Deficient                                             | WT                                                    | Deficient                                      | WT                                             | Deficient                                                                  | WT                                                                         |
| CD11a                                     | 64 ± 5.9                                              | 48 ± 4.3                                              | 16 ± 1.3                                       | 18 ± 0.9                                       | 36 ± 2.2                                                                   | 45 ± 3.0                                                                   |
| CD11b                                     | 44 ± 6.5                                              | 48 ± 4.3                                              | 19 ± 4.3                                       | 18 ± 0.9                                       | 44 ± 2.7                                                                   |                                                                            |
| CD18  (Chimeric  mice)                    | 49 ± 6.1*                                             | 0.38 ± 0.10                                           | 21 ± 1.8                                       | 23 ± 1.8                                       | 56 ± 4.5                                                                   | 58 ± 5.1                                                                   |
| CD44                                      | 21 ± 5.1                                              | 17 ± 5.1                                              | 25 ± 1.5                                       | 25 ± 2.9                                       | 42 ± 3.2                                                                   | 41 ± 3.8                                                                   |

Table 3. MyD88 but not TRIF modulates expression of IFN-γ in lung neutrophils, particularly those in the BALF. The role of MyD88 and TRIF was examined in neutrophils in BALF and lung tissue after lavage. Flow cytometry was performed to detect intracellular IFN-γ levels in neutrophils (Ly6G+) in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and in the lung tissue after lavage of S. pneumoniae infected mice. Isotype-matched control antibody was used for assessing the level of background staining. The mutant genotypes were compared to genderand age-matched WT mice. Data are expressed as the mean + SEM (n=5-7) . *, p ≤0.05 compared to WT using 2-tailed t tests.  †, p=0.07 compared with WT (t test).

|                                                     |                                                     | Study comparing WT  and  Myd88 -/-  mice   | Study comparing WT  and  Myd88 -/-  mice   | Study comparing WT  and  Ticam1 -/-  mice   | Study comparing WT  and  Ticam1 -/-  mice   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
|                                                     |                                                     | Myd88 -/-                                  | WT                                         | Ticam1 -/-                                  | WT                                          |
| Total neutrophils in BALF x10   6                   | Total neutrophils in BALF x10   6                   | 1.0 ± 0.1*                                 | 3.2 ± 0.4                                  | 5.4 ± 0.3*                                  | 3.9 ± 0.2                                   |
| % IFN-γ+ neutrophils                                | % high                                              | 13 ± 1.6*                                  | 27 ± 3.2                                   | 26 ± 2.2                                    | 24 ± 2.2                                    |
| in BALF                                             | % high +  moderate                                  | 28 ± 3.4*                                  | 51 ± 4.6                                   | 51 ± 7.6                                    | 51 ± 6.4                                    |
| Total neutrophils in lung digest  after BAL x10   6 | Total neutrophils in lung digest  after BAL x10   6 | 19 ± 2.0                                   | 21 ± 4.0                                   | 22 ± 1.3                                    | 23 ± 3.0                                    |
| % IFN-γ+ neutrophils                                | % high                                              | 16 ± 2.6*                                  | 30 ± 2.4                                   | 29 ± 1.9                                    | 22 ± 3.3                                    |
| in lung tissue after  BALF                          | % high +  moderate                                  | 22 ± 4.1†                                  | 36 ± 5.6                                   | 56 ± 3.6                                    | 50 ± 6.6                                    |
| MFI of all neutrophils                              | BAL                                                 | 5.9 ± 0.9*                                 | 16 ± 2.4                                   | 11 ± 1.0                                    | 11 ± 0.6                                    |
|                                                     | Lung  digest                                        | 5.0 ± 1.0*                                 | 14 ± 1.2                                   | 11 ± 1.0                                    | 9.0 ± 1.1                                   |
| MFI of IFN-γ+  neutrophils                          | BAL                                                 | 30 ± 1.4                                   | 33 ± 3.0                                   | 24 ± 3.2                                    | 23 ± 2.2                                    |
| MFI of IFN-γ+  neutrophils                          | Lung  digest                                        | 39 ± 2.3                                   | 48 ± 7.1                                   | 23 ± 1.9                                    | 20 ± 1.4                                    |

Table 4. Signaling initiated through TLR2 and TLR4 does not modulate expression of IFN-γ in lung  neutrophils.    TLR2  and  TLR4  are  not  required  for  IFN-γ  production  by  neutrophils.  No significant difference in the total number of neutrophils and the percentage of IFN-γ+ neutrophils in the pneumonic lung in coincidently studied WT and mice lacking TLR2 ( Tlr2 -/-), TLR4 ( Tlr4 -/-) or both TLR2 and TLR4 ( Tlr2/4 -/-). Data are mean ± SEM (n=4-5 per genotype).

| Molecule  deficient in  deficient  mice   | Number of neutrophils  in pneumonic lung   | Number of neutrophils  in pneumonic lung   | Percentage of  neutrophils expressing  IFN-γ   | Percentage of  neutrophils expressing  IFN-γ   | Percentage of  neutrophils expressing  moderate or high  levels of IFN-γ   | Percentage of  neutrophils expressing  moderate or high  levels of IFN-γ   |
|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                           | Deficient                                  | WT                                         | Deficient                                      | WT                                             | Deficient                                                                  | WT                                                                         |
| TLR2/4                                    | 23 ± 1.1                                   | 29 ± 3.2                                   | 20 ± 3.7                                       | 24 ± 3.0                                       | 38 ± 7.3                                                                   | 44 ± 4.5                                                                   |
| TLR2                                      | 24 ± 1.7                                   | 29 ± 3.2                                   | 20 ± 5.2                                       | 24 ± 3.0                                       | 37 ± 8.6                                                                   | 44 ± 4.5                                                                   |
| TLR4                                      | 31 ± 5.0                                   | 29 ± 3.2                                   | 26 ± 3.7                                       | 24 ± 3.0                                       | 46 ± 6.0                                                                   | 44 ± 4.5                                                                   |

Table 5.  TLR2 and TLR4 are not required for IFN-γ expression by neutrophils in the airspace and lung tissue. IFN-γ expression was determined in neutrophils (Ly6G+) in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and in the lung tissue after lavage of S. pneumoniae -infected WT mice and mice lacking both TLR2 and TLR4 ( Tlr2/4 -/-). No significant differences were found using t test to compare genotypes (n=4 from 2 separate experiments).

|                                                     |                                                     | Tlr2/4 -/-   | WT        |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------|-----------|
| Total neutrophils in BALF x10   6                   | Total neutrophils in BALF x10   6                   | 3.5 ± 0.4    | 3.0 ± 0.7 |
| % IFN-γ+ neutrophils  in BALF                       | % high                                              | 35 ± 10      | 37 ± 9.2  |
|                                                     | % high +  moderate                                  | 50 ± 5.4     | 54 ± 2.7  |
| Total neutrophils in lung digest  after BAL x10   6 | Total neutrophils in lung digest  after BAL x10   6 | 38 ± 7.4     | 26 ± 5.2  |
| % IFN-γ+ neutrophils  in lung tissue after          | % high                                              | 35 ± 3.8     | 44 ± 7.6  |
| BALF                                                | % high +  moderate                                  | 51 ± 7.9     | 56 ± 10.4 |
| MFI of all neutrophils                              | BALF                                                | 8.7 ± 2.1    | 9.6 ± 1.5 |
|                                                     | Lung  digest                                        | 8.8 ± 2.3    | 11 ± 3.2  |
| MFI of IFN-γ+                                       | BALF                                                | 17 ± 1.9     | 17 ± 1.9  |
| neutrophils                                         | Lung  digest                                        | 18 ± 3.2     | 17 ± 2.9  |

Table 6b. The number of genes in table 6a that also met the additional criterion of the ratio of the fold change in SP compared to PBS being greater than 1.5.

|                         | Up regulated   &gt; 2 fold   | Down regulated  &gt; 2 fold   | Total   |
|-------------------------|---------------------------|----------------------------|---------|
| High SP vs. PBS         |                           |                            |         |
| Common                  | 1101                      | 1214                       | 2315    |
| Unique to WT BM         | 334                       | 364                        | 698     |
| Unique to  Ifng -/-  BM | 141                       | 211                        | 352     |
| Low SP vs. PBS          |                           |                            |         |
| Common                  | 1041                      | 1060                       | 2101    |
| Unique to WT BM         | 188                       | 288                        | 476     |
| Unique to  Ifng -/-  BM | 175                       | 160                        | 335     |

Table 6a. The number of up- or down-regulated transcripts that were differentially expressed during high or low dose S. pneumoniae (SP) pneumonia compared with PBS controls in Ifng -/-mice that were reconstituted with WT BM or IFN-γ deficient BM or were expressed in both (Common). The hematopoietic system of Ifng -/-mice was reconstituted with WT or Ifng -/-BM cells.  Transcripts were considered to be differentially expressed after passing filtering criteria (FDR adjusted p≤0.05, fold change ≥2 compared with PBS).  n=4 mice in each group.

| High SP vs. PBS         | &gt; 2 fold up   and &gt; 1.5x ratio   | &gt; 2 fold down  and &gt; 1.5x ratio   | Total   |
|-------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------|
| High SP vs. PBS         |                                  |                                   |         |
| Common                  | 131                              | 39                                | 170     |
| Unique to WT BM         | 103                              | 57                                | 160     |
| Unique to  Ifng -/-  BM | 22                               | 22                                | 44      |
| Low SP vs PBS           |                                  |                                   |         |
| Common                  | 75                               | 34                                | 109     |
| Unique to WT BM         | 50                               | 30                                | 80      |
| Unique to  Ifng -/-  BM | 20                               | 6                                 | 26      |

| Gene     | Description                                                                                | High dose SP  SP/PBS  Fold           | High dose SP  SP/PBS  Fold          | High dose SP  SP/PBS  Fold                                              | Low dose SP  SP/PBS  Fold            | Low dose SP  SP/PBS  Fold           | Low dose SP  SP/PBS  Fold                                               |
|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Symbol   |                                                                                            | SP/PBS  fold  change in  WT BM  mice | fold  change in  Ifng -/-  BM  mice | change in  WT BM  mice with  SP  compared  to Ifng-/-  BM mice  with SP | SP/PBS  fold  change in  WT BM  mice | fold  change in  Ifng -/-  BM  mice | change in  WT BM  mice with  SP  compared  to Ifng-/-  BM mice  with SP |
| Apol10b  | apolipoprotein L 10B  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3043522]                                 | 3.7                                  | 1.5                                 | 3.3                                                                     | 3.7                                  | 1.2                                 | 4.0                                                                     |
| Apol6    | apolipoprotein L 6  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1919189]                                   | 4.1                                  | 1.6                                 | 2.8                                                                     | 5.1                                  | 1.3                                 | 4.2                                                                     |
| Batf2    | basic leucine zipper  transcription factor, ATF- like 2 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:192173 | 8.3                                  | 2.9                                 | 2.6                                                                     | 7.9                                  | 2.1                                 | 3.4                                                                     |
| BC023105 | cDNA sequence  BC023105 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:2384767]                               | 8.9                                  | 3.8                                 | 2.9                                                                     | 10.0                                 | 4.3                                 | 3.0                                                                     |
| Ciita    | class II transactivator  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:108445]                               | 1.4                                  | -1.9                                | 2.4                                                                     | 2.1                                  | -1.4                                | 2.5                                                                     |
| Cxcl9    | chemokine (C-X-C motif)  ligand 9 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1352449]                     | 28.9                                 | 21.6                                | 3.3                                                                     | 32.1                                 | 18.2                                | 4.3                                                                     |
| Fam26f   | family with sequence  similarity 26, member F  [Source:MGI                                 | 12.9                                 | 3.2                                 | 3.7                                                                     | 10.9                                 | 2.2                                 | 4.6                                                                     |
| Gbp10    | guanylate-binding protein  10 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:4359647]                         | 7.4                                  | 3.1                                 | 3.1                                                                     | 8.2                                  | 2.8                                 | 3.8                                                                     |
| Gbp11    | guanylate binding protein  11 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3646307]                         | 10.0                                 | 4.2                                 | 3.0                                                                     | 13.0                                 | 3.0                                 | 5.4                                                                     |
| Gbp4     | guanylate binding protein  4 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:97072]                            | 4.1                                  | 2.1                                 | 3.1                                                                     | 4.8                                  | 1.9                                 | 4.2                                                                     |
| Gm12185  | predicted gene 12185  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3652173]                                 | 5.7                                  | 2.5                                 | 2.5                                                                     | 4.4                                  | 2.0                                 | 2.4                                                                     |
| Gm12250  | predicted gene 12250  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3649299]                                 | 20.5                                 | 12.8                                | 2.2                                                                     | 18.8                                 | 11.1                                | 2.3                                                                     |
| Gm22079  | predicted gene, 22079  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:5451856]                                | 3.1                                  | 1.1                                 | 2.9                                                                     | 3.7                                  | 1.4                                 | 2.6                                                                     |
| Gm4841   | predicted gene 4841  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3643814]                                  | 10.0                                 | 2.8                                 | 3.8                                                                     | 14.4                                 | 3.4                                 | 4.4                                                                     |

Table 7. Transcripts that are significantly differentially expressed 2 fold or greater in Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with WT BM compared with Ifng -/-BM-reconstituted in both high dose and low dose S. pneumoniae (SP) pneumonia.  Genes that have been previously described in the literature as IFN-γ regulated are shown in bold print.

| Ido1                                                                                               | indoleamine 2,3- dioxygenase 1  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:96416]   |   10.5 | 1.6   | 7.6      |   12.9 | 1.5      | 10.2   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|--------|-------|----------|--------|----------|--------|
| interferon gamma induced  GTPase [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:107729]  interferon regulatory factor | 7.3                                                                  |    4.5 | 2.1   | 7.7      |    4.3 | 2.3      | Igtp   |
| Irf1  1 [Source:MGI                                                                                | 4.1                                                                  |    2   | 2.2   | 4.0      |    1.6 | 2.8      |        |
| Pydc3                                                                                              | pyrin domain containing 3  6.0                                       |   -1   |       | 7.4      |    3.8 | -1.0     | 4.7    |
| SLAM family member 8  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1921998]                                         | 6.7                                                                  |    1.7 |       | 3.2  9.7 |    2.6 | 3.0      | Slamf8 |
| suppressor of cytokine  signaling 1 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1354910]                           | 13.4                                                                 |    6.4 | 2.3   | 11.1     |    5   | 2.4      | Socs1  |
| T cell specific GTPase 1  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:98734]                                       | 10.9                                                                 |    2   | 5.7   | 11.5     |    2.1 | 5.7      | Tgtp1  |
| T cell specific GTPase 2  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3710083]                                     | 13.0                                                                 |    7.4 | 2.8   |          |   13.9 | 5.9  3.7 | Tgtp2  |

Table 8. GSEA identified Gene Ontology (GO) biological pathways showing highly significant enrichment in WT BM-reconstituted mice with SP compared to IFN-γ -/- BM-reconstituted mice with SP (FDR≤0.0001).  These pathways were also significantly enriched in mice with high dose SP compared to PBS, regardless of the donor BM genotype.

| Gene  Ontology     | Functional Term                                                         |
|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Set ID  GO:0001562 | response to protozoan                                                   |
| GO:0001819         | positive regulation of cytokine production                              |
| GO:0042832         | defense response to protozoan                                           |
| GO:0035456         | response to interferon-beta                                             |
| GO:0034341         | response to interferon-gamma                                            |
| GO:0045087         | innate immune response                                                  |
| GO:0031341         | regulation of cell killing                                              |
| GO:0071346         | cellular response to interferon-gamma                                   |
| GO:0045428         | regulation of nitric oxide biosynthetic process                         |
| GO:0001906         | cell killing                                                            |
| GO:0031343         | positive regulation of cell killing                                     |
| GO:0046209         | nitric oxide metabolic process                                          |
| GO:0001909         | leukocyte mediated cytotoxicity                                         |
| GO:0045429         | positive regulation of nitric oxide biosynthetic process                |
| GO:0045088         | regulation of innate immune response  nitric oxide biosynthetic process |
| GO:0006809         |                                                                         |
| GO:0035458         | cellular response to interferon-beta                                    |
| GO:0002697         | regulation of immune effector process                                   |
| GO:0032732         | positive regulation of interleukin-1 production                         |
| GO:0006955         | immune response                                                         |

## References

- 1. Mizgerd JP. Respiratory infection and the impact of pulmonary immunity on lung health and disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012;186(9):824-829.
- 2. Mantovani A, Cassatella MA, Costantini C, Jaillon S. Neutrophils in the activation and regulation of innate and adaptive immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 2011;11(8):519-531.
- 3. Yamada M, Gomez JC, Chugh PE, Lowell CA, Dinauer MC, Dittmer DP, Doerschuk CM. Interferon-{gamma} production by neutrophils during bacterial pneumonia in mice. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011;183(10):1391-1401.
- 4. Trinchieri G. Interleukin-12 and the regulation of innate resistance and adaptive immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 2003;3(2):133-146.
- 5. Munder M, Mallo M, Eichmann K, Modolell M. Murine macrophages secrete interferon gamma upon combined stimulation with interleukin (il)-12 and il-18: A novel pathway of autocrine macrophage activation. J Exp Med 1998;187(12):2103-2108.
- 6. Fukao T, Matsuda S, Koyasu S. Synergistic effects of il-4 and il-18 on il-12-dependent ifn-gamma production by dendritic cells. J Immunol 2000;164(1):64-71.
- 7. Ohteki T, Fukao T, Suzue K, Maki C, Ito M, Nakamura M, Koyasu S. Interleukin 12dependent interferon gamma production by cd8alpha+ lymphoid dendritic cells. J Exp Med 1999;189(12):1981-1986.
- 8. Bacon CM, Petricoin EF, 3rd, Ortaldo JR, Rees RC, Larner AC, Johnston JA, O'Shea JJ. Interleukin 12 induces tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of stat4 in human lymphocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92(16):7307-7311.
- 9. Thierfelder WE, van Deursen JM, Yamamoto K, Tripp RA, Sarawar SR, Carson RT, Sangster MY, Vignali DA, Doherty PC, Grosveld GC, et al. Requirement for stat4 in interleukin12-mediated responses of natural killer and t cells. Nature 1996;382(6587):171-174.
- 10. Li S, Yamauchi A, Marchal CC, Molitoris JK, Quilliam LA, Dinauer MC. Chemoattractantstimulated rac activation in wild-type and rac2-deficient murine neutrophils: Preferential activation of rac2 and rac2 gene dosage effect on neutrophil functions. J Immunol 2002;169(9):5043-5051.
- 11. Bedard K, Krause KH. The nox family of ros-generating nadph oxidases: Physiology and pathophysiology. Physiol Rev 2007;87(1):245-313.
- 12. Cho HY, Reddy SP, Kleeberger SR. Nrf2 defends the lung from oxidative stress. Antioxid Redox Signal 2006;8(1-2):76-87.
- 13. Kobayashi M, Yamamoto M. Nrf2-keap1 regulation of cellular defense mechanisms against electrophiles and reactive oxygen species. Adv Enzyme Regul 2006;46:113-140.
- 14. Thimmulappa RK, Lee H, Rangasamy T, Reddy SP, Yamamoto M, Kensler TW, Biswal S. Nrf2 is a critical regulator of the innate immune response and survival during experimental sepsis. J Clin Invest 2006;116(4):984-995.
- 15. Reddy NM, Suryanarayana V, Kalvakolanu DV, Yamamoto M, Kensler TW, Hassoun PM, Kleeberger SR, Reddy SP. Innate immunity against bacterial infection following hyperoxia exposure is impaired in nrf2-deficient mice. J Immunol 2009;183(7):4601-4608.
- 16. Cho HY, Imani F, Miller-DeGraff L, Walters D, Melendi GA, Yamamoto M, Polack FP, Kleeberger SR. Antiviral activity of nrf2 in a murine model of respiratory syncytial virus disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009;179(2):138-150.
- 17. Kong X, Thimmulappa R, Craciun F, Harvey C, Singh A, Kombairaju P, Reddy SP, Remick D, Biswal S. Enhancing nrf2 pathway by disruption of keap1 in myeloid leukocytes protects against sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011;184(8):928-938.

- 18. Harvey CJ, Thimmulappa RK, Sethi S, Kong X, Yarmus L, Brown RH, Feller-Kopman D, Wise R, Biswal S. Targeting nrf2 signaling improves bacterial clearance by alveolar macrophages in patients with copd and in a mouse model. Sci Transl Med 2011;3(78):78ra32.
- 19. MacGarvey NC, Suliman HB, Bartz RR, Fu P, Withers CM, Welty-Wolf KE, Piantadosi CA. Activation of mitochondrial biogenesis by heme oxygenase-1-mediated nf-e2-related factor2 induction rescues mice from lethal staphylococcus aureus sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012;185(8):851-861.
- 20. Piantadosi CA, Withers CM, Bartz RR, MacGarvey NC, Fu P, Sweeney TE, Welty-Wolf KE, Suliman HB. Heme oxygenase-1 couples activation of mitochondrial biogenesis to antiinflammatory cytokine expression. J Biol Chem 2011;286(18):16374-16385.
- 21. Berton G, Mocsai A, Lowell CA. Src and syk kinases: Key regulators of phagocytic cell activation. Trends Immunol 2005;26(4):208-214.
- 22. Dib K, Melander F, Axelsson L, Dagher MC, Aspenstrom P, Andersson T. Downregulation of rac activity during beta 2 integrin-mediated adhesion of human neutrophils. J Biol Chem 2003;278(26):24181-24188.
- 23. Giagulli C, Ottoboni L, Caveggion E, Rossi B, Lowell C, Constantin G, Laudanna C, Berton G. The src family kinases hck and fgr are dispensable for inside-out, chemoattractantinduced signaling regulating beta 2 integrin affinity and valency in neutrophils, but are required for beta 2 integrin-mediated outside-in signaling involved in sustained adhesion. J Immunol 2006;177(1):604-611.
- 24. Zhao T, Benard V, Bohl BP, Bokoch GM. The molecular basis for adhesion-mediated suppression of reactive oxygen species generation by human neutrophils. J Clin Invest 2003;112(11):1732-1740.
- 25. Vachon E, Martin R, Kwok V, Cherepanov V, Chow CW, Doerschuk CM, Plumb J, Grinstein S, Downey GP. Cd44-mediated phagocytosis induces inside-out activation of complement receptor-3 in murine macrophages. Blood 2007;110(13):4492-4502.
- 26. Lien E, Sellati TJ, Yoshimura A, Flo TH, Rawadi G, Finberg RW, Carroll JD, Espevik T, Ingalls RR, Radolf JD, et al. Toll-like receptor 2 functions as a pattern recognition receptor for diverse bacterial products. J Biol Chem 1999;274(47):33419-33425.
- 27. Yoshimura A, Lien E, Ingalls RR, Tuomanen E, Dziarski R, Golenbock D. Cutting edge: Recognition of gram-positive bacterial cell wall components by the innate immune system occurs via toll-like receptor 2. J Immunol 1999;163(1):1-5.
- 28. Malley R, Henneke P, Morse SC, Cieslewicz MJ, Lipsitch M, Thompson CM, Kurt-Jones E, Paton JC, Wessels MR, Golenbock DT. Recognition of pneumolysin by toll-like receptor 4 confers resistance to pneumococcal infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100(4):19661971.
- 29. Dessing MC, Hirst RA, de Vos AF, van der Poll T. Role of toll-like receptors 2 and 4 in pulmonary inflammation and injury induced by pneumolysin in mice. PLoS One 2009;4(11):e7993.
- 30. Ve T, Gay NJ, Mansell A, Kobe B, Kellie S. Adaptors in toll-like receptor signaling and their potential as therapeutic targets. Curr Drug Targets 2012;13(11):1360-1374.
- 31. Oshiumi H, Matsumoto M, Funami K, Akazawa T, Seya T. Ticam-1, an adaptor molecule that participates in toll-like receptor 3-mediated interferon-beta induction. Nat Immunol 2003;4(2):161-167.
- 32. Yamamoto M, Sato S, Mori K, Hoshino K, Takeuchi O, Takeda K, Akira S. Cutting edge: A novel toll/il-1 receptor domain-containing adapter that preferentially activates the ifn-beta promoter in the toll-like receptor signaling. J Immunol 2002;169(12):6668-6672.
- 33. Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Hoshino K, Kaisho T, Sanjo H, Takeuchi O, Sugiyama M, Okabe M, Takeda K, et al. Role of adaptor trif in the myd88-independent toll-like receptor signaling pathway. Science 2003;301(5633):640-643.

- 34. Skerrett SJ, Liggitt HD, Hajjar AM, Wilson CB. Cutting edge: Myeloid differentiation factor 88 is essential for pulmonary host defense against pseudomonas aeruginosa but not staphylococcus aureus. J Immunol 2004;172(6):3377-3381.
- 35. Balamayooran G, Batra S, Fessler MB, Happel KI, Jeyaseelan S. Mechanisms of neutrophil accumulation in the lungs against bacteria. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2010;43(1):516.
- 36. Jeyaseelan S, Young SK, Fessler MB, Liu Y, Malcolm KC, Yamamoto M, Akira S, Worthen GS. Toll/il-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing ifn-beta (trif)-mediated signaling contributes to innate immune responses in the lung during escherichia coli pneumonia. J Immunol 2007;178(5):3153-3160.
- 37. Cai S, Batra S, Shen L, Wakamatsu N, Jeyaseelan S. Both trif- and myd88-dependent signaling contribute to host defense against pulmonary klebsiella infection. J Immunol 2009;183(10):6629-6638.
- 38. Power MR, Li B, Yamamoto M, Akira S, Lin TJ. A role of toll-il-1 receptor domaincontaining adaptor-inducing ifn-beta in the host response to pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection in mice. J Immunol 2007;178(5):3170-3176.
- 39. Geng S, Matsushima H, Okamoto T, Yao Y, Lu R, Page K, Blumenthal RM, Ward NL, Miyazaki T, Takashima A. Emergence, origin, and function of neutrophil-dendritic cell hybrids in experimentally induced inflammatory lesions in mice. Blood 2013;121(10):1690-1700.
- 40. Matsushima H, Geng S, Lu R, Okamoto T, Yao Y, Mayuzumi N, Kotol PF, Chojnacki BJ, Miyazaki T, Gallo RL, et al. Neutrophil differentiation into a unique hybrid population exhibiting dual phenotype and functionality of neutrophils and dendritic cells. Blood 2013;121(10):16771689.
- 41. Mattner F, Magram J, Ferrante J, Launois P, Di Padova K, Behin R, Gately MK, Louis JA, Alber G. Genetically resistant mice lacking interleukin-12 are susceptible to infection with leishmania major and mount a polarized th2 cell response. Eur J Immunol 1996;26(7):15531559.
- 42. Abram CL, Lowell CA. The ins and outs of leukocyte integrin signaling. Annu Rev Immunol 2009;27:339-362.
- 43. Oertli B, Beck-Schimmer B, Fan X, Wuthrich RP. Mechanisms of hyaluronan-induced up-regulation of icam-1 and vcam-1 expression by murine kidney tubular epithelial cells: Hyaluronan triggers cell adhesion molecule expression through a mechanism involving activation of nuclear factor-kappa b and activating protein-1. J Immunol
- 44. upregulates icam-1 and vcam-1. FEBS Lett 2003;539(1-3):45-50.
- 1998;161(7):3431-3437. Fujii Y, Fujii K, Nakano K, Tanaka Y. Crosslinking of cd44 on human osteoblastic cells
- 45. Fujisaki T, Tanaka Y, Fujii K, Mine S, Saito K, Yamada S, Yamashita U, Irimura T, Eto S. Cd44 stimulation induces integrin-mediated adhesion of colon cancer cell lines to endothelial cells by up-regulation of integrins and c-met and activation of integrins. Cancer Res 1999;59(17):4427-4434.
- 46. Kamata H, Honda S, Maeda S, Chang L, Hirata H, Karin M. Reactive oxygen species promote tnfalpha-induced death and sustained jnk activation by inhibiting map kinase phosphatases. Cell 2005;120(5):649-661.
- 47. Kim HS, Ullevig SL, Zamora D, Lee CF, Asmis R. Redox regulation of mapk phosphatase 1 controls monocyte migration and macrophage recruitment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109(41):E2803-2812.
- 48. Rusinova I, Forster S, Yu S, Kannan A, Masse M, Cumming H, Chapman R, Hertzog PJ. Interferome v2.0: An updated database of annotated interferon-regulated genes. Nucleic Acids Res 2013;41(Database issue):D1040-1046.
- 49. Marinescu VD, Kohane IS, Riva A. Mapper: A search engine for the computational identification of putative transcription factor binding sites in multiple genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2005;6:79.

- 50. Marinescu VD, Kohane IS, Riva A. The mapper database: A multi-genome catalog of putative transcription factor binding sites. Nucleic Acids Res 2005;33(Database issue):D91-97.
- 51. Ellis TN, Beaman BL. Murine polymorphonuclear neutrophils produce interferon-gamma in response to pulmonary infection with nocardia asteroides. J Leukoc Biol 2002;72(2):373-381.
- 52. Nance S, Cross R, Yi AK, Fitzpatrick EA. Ifn-gamma production by innate immune cells is sufficient for development of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Eur J Immunol 2005;35(6):19281938.
- 53. Kirby AC, Yrlid U, Wick MJ. The innate immune response differs in primary and secondary salmonella infection. J Immunol 2002;169(8):4450-4459.
- 54. Yin J, Ferguson TA. Identification of an ifn-gamma-producing neutrophil early in the response to listeria monocytogenes. J Immunol 2009;182(11):7069-7073.
- 55. Yasunami Y, Kojo S, Kitamura H, Toyofuku A, Satoh M, Nakano M, Nabeyama K, Nakamura Y, Matsuoka N, Ikeda S, et al. Valpha14 nk t cell-triggered ifn-gamma production by gr-1+cd11b+ cells mediates early graft loss of syngeneic transplanted islets. J Exp Med 2005;202(7):913-918.
- 56. De Pascalis R, Taylor BC, Elkins KL. Diverse myeloid and lymphoid cell subpopulations produce gamma interferon during early innate immune responses to francisella tularensis live vaccine strain. Infect Immun 2008;76(9):4311-4321.
- 57. Li L, Huang L, Sung SS, Lobo PI, Brown MG, Gregg RK, Engelhard VH, Okusa MD. Nkt cell activation mediates neutrophil ifn-gamma production and renal ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Immunol 2007;178(9):5899-5911.
- 58. Brombacher F, Dorfmuller A, Magram J, Dai WJ, Kohler G, Wunderlin A, PalmerLehmann K, Gately MK, Alber G. Il-12 is dispensable for innate and adaptive immunity against low doses of listeria monocytogenes. Int Immunol 1999;11(3):325-332.
- 59. Freudenberg MA, Merlin T, Kalis C, Chvatchko Y, Stubig H, Galanos C. Cutting edge: A murine, il-12-independent pathway of ifn-gamma induction by gram-negative bacteria based on stat4 activation by type i ifn and il-18 signaling. J Immunol 2002;169(4):1665-1668.
- 60. Robinson D, Shibuya K, Mui A, Zonin F, Murphy E, Sana T, Hartley SB, Menon S, Kastelein R, Bazan F, et al. Igif does not drive th1 development but synergizes with il-12 for interferon-gamma production and activates irak and nfkappab. Immunity 1997;7(4):571-581.
- 61. Muller U, Kohler G, Mossmann H, Schaub GA, Alber G, Di Santo JP, Brombacher F, Holscher C. Il-12-independent ifn-gamma production by t cells in experimental chagas' disease is mediated by il-18. J Immunol 2001;167(6):3346-3353.
- 62. Abdelsamed HA, Desai M, Nance SC, Fitzpatrick EA. T-bet controls severity of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. J Inflamm (Lond) 2011;8(1):15.
- 63. Yeaman GR, Collins JE, Currie JK, Guyre PM, Wira CR, Fanger MW. Ifn-gamma is produced by polymorphonuclear neutrophils in human uterine endometrium and by cultured peripheral blood polymorphonuclear neutrophils. J Immunol 1998;160(10):5145-5153.
- 64. Balasubramani A, Mukasa R, Hatton RD, Weaver CT. Regulation of the ifng locus in the context of t-lineage specification and plasticity. Immunol Rev 2010;238(1):216-232.
- 65. Gill S, Vasey AE, De Souza A, Baker J, Smith AT, Kohrt HE, Florek M, Gibbs KD, Jr., Tate K, Ritchie DS, et al. Rapid development of exhaustion and down-regulation of eomesodermin limit the antitumor activity of adoptively transferred murine natural killer cells. Blood 2012;119(24):5758-5768.
- 66. Mullen AC, High FA, Hutchins AS, Lee HW, Villarino AV, Livingston DM, Kung AL, Cereb N, Yao TP, Yang SY, et al. Role of t-bet in commitment of th1 cells before il-12dependent selection. Science 2001;292(5523):1907-1910.
- 67. Lee KS, Scanga CA, Bachelder EM, Chen Q, Snapper CM. Tlr2 synergizes with both tlr4 and tlr9 for induction of the myd88-dependent splenic cytokine and chemokine response to streptococcus pneumoniae. Cell Immunol 2007;245(2):103-110.

- 68. Albiger B, Dahlberg S, Sandgren A, Wartha F, Beiter K, Katsuragi H, Akira S, Normark S, Henriques-Normark B. Toll-like receptor 9 acts at an early stage in host defence against pneumococcal infection. Cell Microbiol 2007;9(3):633-644.
- 69. Witzenrath M, Pache F, Lorenz D, Koppe U, Gutbier B, Tabeling C, Reppe K, Meixenberger K, Dorhoi A, Ma J, et al. The nlrp3 inflammasome is differentially activated by pneumolysin variants and contributes to host defense in pneumococcal pneumonia. J Immunol 2011;187(1):434-440.
- 70. McNeela EA, Burke A, Neill DR, Baxter C, Fernandes VE, Ferreira D, Smeaton S, ElRachkidy R, McLoughlin RM, Mori A, et al. Pneumolysin activates the nlrp3 inflammasome and promotes proinflammatory cytokines independently of tlr4. PLoS Pathog 2010;6(11):e1001191.
- 71. Davis KM, Nakamura S, Weiser JN. Nod2 sensing of lysozyme-digested peptidoglycan promotes macrophage recruitment and clearance of s. Pneumoniae colonization in mice. J Clin Invest 2011;121(9):3666-3676.
- 72. Parker D, Martin FJ, Soong G, Harfenist BS, Aguilar JL, Ratner AJ, Fitzgerald KA, Schindler C, Prince A. Streptococcus pneumoniae DNA initiates type i interferon signaling in the respiratory tract. MBio 2011;2(3):e00016-00011.
- 73. Groom JR, Luster AD. Cxcr3 ligands: Redundant, collaborative and antagonistic functions. Immunol Cell Biol 2011;89(2):207-215.

<!-- image -->

## Figure 1C Page 31 of 47

Copyright ' 2014 by the American Thoracic Society

<!-- image -->

## Figure 2A

Copyright ' 2014 by the American Thoracic Society

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

18x13mm (600 x 600 DPI)

Copyright ' 2014 by the American Thoracic Society

<!-- image -->

Copyright ' 2014 by the American Thoracic Society

<!-- image -->

Figure 5

18x13mm (600 x 600 DPI)

<!-- image -->

Page 37 of 47

Figure 6

AJRCMB Articles in Press. Published on 06-August-2014 as 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0316OC

S. pneumoniae

IL-12

IL-12R

X

STAT4

PRRs?

MyD88

TRIF

Fgr/Hck/Lyn SFK

Rac2

NADPH oxidase

ROS

IFN-γ

CalDAG-GEFI

Transcription of IFN-γ regulated genes Copyright ' 2014 by the American Thoracic Society

Neutrophil

ROS

Nrf2

## Online Supplemental Material

## Materials and Methods

## Reagents

Dispase II and collagenase/dispase were purchased from Roche Applied Science (Indianapolis, IN); fetal calf serum (FCS), phosphate buffered saline (PBS), Novex precast gels, NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer and Colloidal Blue Staining Kit were from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA); deoxyribonuclease I from bovine pancreas, red blood cell lysing buffer, paraformaldehyde, and protease inhibitor cocktail were from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Cell lysis buffer was from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). PE-conjugated rat anti-mouse IFN-γ antibody (clone XMG1.2), fixable viability dye, fluorochrome-conjugated isotype control antibodies, brefeldin A, and permeabilization buffer were purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA); FITCconjugated rat anti-mouse Ly6G antibody (clone 1A8) and rat anti-mouse FcεIII/II receptor antibody (clone 2.4G2) were purchased from BD Pharmingen (San Diego, CA); APC-conjugated Armenian hamster anti-mouse CD11c (clone N418) and isotype control were purchased from BioLegend (San Diego, CA). The antibodies for total STAT4 and phospho-STAT4 (phosphorylated at Tyr 693) were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology.

## Mice

Adult C57BL/6 (WT) mice and mice deficient in CD18 ( Itgb2 -/-), MyD88 ( Myd88 -/), IFN-γ ( Ifng -/), and the p35 subunit of IL-12 ( Il12a -/-) were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Mice deficient in the NADPH oxidase component gp91 phox ( Cybb -/) were donated by Dr. Mary C. Dinauer (Indiana University).  Mice deficient in TRIF ( Ticam1 -/) were obtained from Dr. Shizuo Akira at Osaka University (E1). Tlr2 -/-and Tlr4 -/-were obtained from Jackson Laboratory, and Tlr2/4 doubly deficient mice were generated by crossing singly deficient mice (provided by Dr. Mark Heise at the University of North Carolina).   Nrf2 null mice ( Nfe2l2 -/-) were obtained from Dr. Masayuki Yamamoto at Tohoku University (E2). Gene-targeted mice were backcrossed to C57BL/6 mice for at least 10 generations. Age- and gender-matched mice were used at 6-8 weeks of age.

All animal studies were performed in compliance with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.  Animal studies were reviewed and approved by our Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

## Bacterial pneumonia

Streptococcus pneumoniae ( S. pneumoniae ; serotype 19, ATCC 49619) used in this study was purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). Suspensions of S. pneumoniae were prepared in PBS, and bacterial concentration was set by measuring optical density at 600 nm (O.D. = 1.0). Pneumonia was induced by intratracheal instillation of the bacterial suspension into the left lung at a dose of 2.3 µl/g mouse body weight. Colony forming units (CFU) in bacterial suspensions were subsequently determined by colony counting on agar plates. The range of CFUs was 1.6-5.7 x 10  CFU/mL (mean 3.3 ± 0.24 x 10  CFU / mL), unless 8 8 otherwise indicated in the text.

## Bone marrow chimeric mice

Femurs of WT and CD18 null ( Itgb2 -/-) mice were removed and flushed.  The bone marrow cells were washed and resuspended at a concentration of 25 x 10 /ml.  After oral antibiotics 6 (trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole in the drinking water) for 7 days, WT mice were subjected to total body irradiation at a dose of 9 Gy using a Cs-137 gamma-ray source (Model Mark I-68; J.L. Shepherd &amp; Associates, San Fernando, CA), and their hematopoietic system was reconstituted

using a mixture of WT and Itgb2 -/-(2:1, 5 x 10  total cells) bone marrow cells intravenously.  Oral 6 antibiotics were continued for 3 weeks.  These bone marrow chimeric mice were studied after at least 38 days.

Ifng -/-mice were reconstituted with WT or Ifng -/-bone marrow (2x10  cells per mouse IV) using 6 the same approach.  After 22-28 days, these chimeric mice were given either PBS or low or high dose S. pneumoniae .

## Isolation of single lung cells

Mice were euthanized by isoflurane overdose 24 hours after bacterial instillation. The lung vasculature was flushed by perfusing with 10 ml of PBS via the right ventricle, and the lungs and heart were removed. Dispase II solution was instilled into the lungs through the trachea, and the trachea was ligated with silk suture. The samples were incubated for 30 minutes at 37 ˚C. The lungs were excised, minced with scissors and enzymatically digested with 0.1% collagenasedispase and 0.01% deoxyribonuclease I in PBS containing 5 mM CaCl2 at 37˚C for 10 min. The cells were passed through a 100 µm mesh to remove clumps. The cell suspension was resuspended in red blood cell lysis solution, washed several times with PBS and passed through a 40 µm mesh. The total number of cells in each sample was determined using a hemocytometer.

## Bronchoalveolar lavage

Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed by instilling 0.9 mL of ice-cold PBS containing 2 mM EDTA into the lungs via an intratracheal catheter and carefully aspirating the fluid. The lavage was repeated 5 times with fresh buffer and the fluid samples were pooled.

## Immunostaining to identify neutrophils and intracellular IFN-γ

Isolated lung cells were incubated in medium (10%FCS/RPMI1640) containing 3.0 µg/ml brefeldin A for 1 h at 37 ºC. Cells were then centrifuged and resuspended with 2% FCS/PBS. To prevent non-specific binding of antibody to Fc receptors, cells were incubated with anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (Fc block™, BD Pharmingen) at 4°C for 5 minutes. The cells were then incubated with FITC-conjugated antibody to the neutrophil-specific marker Ly6G or the appropriate isotype control (eBioscience) at 4°C in the dark. Cells were washed with 2% FCS/PBS to remove unbound antibody and then fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde. In some studies, cells were stained with a fixable viability dye that stains non-viable cells (eBioscience) prior to fixation. After fixation, cells were washed again with staining buffer and resuspended in cell permeabilization buffer (eBioscience). Then, cells were incubated with PE-conjugated anti-IFN-γ antibody (clone XMG1.2) or isotype control antibody (antibodies were obtained from eBioscience). Cells were washed and resuspended in PBS for analysis using a FACScan (Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems, Mansfield, MA), or CyAn ADP (Dako/BeckmanCoulter, Brea, CA, USA) flow cytometer. In other experiments, neutrophils were isolated for further study from single cell suspensions of lung digests.

## Flow cytometry data analysis

Flow cytometry data were analyzed using FCS Express software (De Novo Software, Los Angeles, CA, USA). Cell doublets and debris were excluded based on forward and side-scatter characteristics, and neutrophils were identified by high surface expression of Ly6G. IFN-γ expression by lung neutrophils was determined by comparing staining with anti-IFN-γ versus staining with an isotype-matched antibody control.

The percentage of Ly6G+ cells that express IFN-γ was calculated using two approaches. In analysis 1, the percentage of high IFN-γ expressors was determined by setting the threshold of

staining above that seen with the isotype-matched antibody control, effectively excluding cells with dim or moderate staining. In analysis 2, the percentage of cells expressing moderate or high IFN-γ was determined by creating gates based on scatter and staining characteristics, and setting the staining threshold with the negative staining controls at less than or equal to 2%. The level of IFN-γ expression was expressed as the median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of IFN-γ staining, estimated as the median channel value for all events that meet the gating criteria after subtracting the signal of the respective isotype control.  The MFI of IFN-γ staining for all lung neutrophils and for high- and moderate IFN-γ-expressing neutrophils was determined. Mutant mice were compared with sex- and age-matched WT mice that were studied at the same time.

## Isolation of neutrophils from single cell suspensions of mouse lungs

Neutrophils were isolated from single cell suspensions using MACS beads (Miltenyi) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, single cell suspensions were prepared from dissected mouse lungs as described above. The cells were washed with PBS containing 2 mM EDTA and 0.5% bovine serum albumin, and incubated with biotin-anti-Ly6G and magnetic beads coated with anti-biotin. The samples were passed through a column in a magnetic field, and cells bound to beads were collected for further analysis.  The neutrophils were always greater than 97% pure, as assessed on cytospins using the Wright stain.

Phosphorylation of signaling molecules, including STAT4 and MAP kinases, in neutrophils Phosphorylated and total STAT4 and phosphorylated and total p38, ERK1/2 and JNK1/2 MAP kinases in neutrophils isolated from the lungs were estimated and compared using Western blots. Densitometry values were corrected for background and expressed in arbitrary units.

## Gene expression profiling to identify IFN-γ regulated genes

Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with either WT or Ifng -/-bone marrow were given either PBS or low or high dose S. pneumoniae (low dose range: 2.96-3.45 x 10  cfu per mouse, high dose range: 6 1.81-1.98 x 10  cfu per mouse), as described above (n = 4 mice in each group).  After 24 hours, 7 the mice were euthanized, and the lungs were dissected out, flash frozen and stored at -80°C.

Total RNA was isolated from homogenized pneumonic lungs using Qiagen miRNeasy mini kit (Valencia, CA, USA).  Expression of RNA transcripts in whole lungs was profiled using Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.1 ST arrays (Santa Clara, CA, USA).  Expression signals from array images were processed by RMA (Robust Multiarray Average) background correction, GC content and sequence correction, quantile normalization, and median polish summarization, and compared using ANOVA on log2 intensities to identify transcripts that were differentially expressed between S. pneumoniae and PBS-treated samples in mice reconstituted with WT or Ifng -/-bone marrow.  Differential expression p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg step-up FDR method.  Expression analyses were performed using Partek Genomics Suite (Partek Inc., St. Louis. MO, USA).  Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed according to the method described in the literature (E3, E4).

## Statistics

Groups were compared using t tests or ANOVA with post hoc tests, as appropriate. Differences between groups were considered significant when p&lt;0.05.

## References

- E1. Yamamoto M, Sato S, Hemmi H, Hoshino K, Kaisho T, Sanjo H, Takeuchi O, Sugiyama M, Okabe M, Takeda K, et al. Role of adaptor trif in the myd88-independent toll-like receptor signaling pathway. Science 2003;301(5633):640-643.
- E2. Itoh K, Chiba T, Takahashi S, Ishii T, Igarashi K, Katoh Y, Oyake T, Hayashi N, Satoh K, Hatayama I, et al. An nrf2/small maf heterodimer mediates the induction of phase ii detoxifying enzyme genes through antioxidant response elements. Biochemical and biophysical research communications 1997;236(2):313-322.
- E3. Tamayo P, Steinhardt G, Liberzon A, Mesirov JP. The limitations of simple gene set enrichment analysis assuming gene independence. Statistical methods in medical research 2012.
- E4. Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2005;102(43):15545-15550.

| Gene Symbol   | Description                                                                                         | High dose SP                         | High dose SP                                | High dose SP                                  | Low dose SP  SP/PBS  fold  Ratio of  fold   | Low dose SP  SP/PBS  fold  Ratio of  fold   | Low dose SP  SP/PBS  fold  Ratio of  fold   |
|---------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
|               |                                                                                                     | SP/PBS  fold  change  in WT  BM mice | SP/PBS  fold  change  in  Ifng -/- BM  mice | Ratio of  fold  changes  in  WT  to  Ifng -/- | SP/PBS  fold  change  in WT  BM mice        | change  in  Ifng -/- BM mice    to          | changes  in  WT  Ifng -/-                   |
| 1700123I01Rik | RIKEN cDNA 1700123I01  gene [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1923913]  3.1                               |                                      | 1.5                                         | 2.0                                           | 3.2                                         | 1.2                                         | 2.6                                         |
| 4933412E12Rik | RIKEN cDNA  4933412E12 gene                                                                         | 2.4                                  | 1.2                                         | 2.0                                           | 2.0                                         | 1.3                                         | 1.5                                         |
| Adamts3       | a disintegrin-like and  metallopeptidase  (reprolysin type) with  thrombospondin type 1 mo          | 2.2                                  | 1.4                                         | 1.5                                           | 2.3                                         | 1.5                                         | 1.5                                         |
| Apol10b       | apolipoprotein L 10B  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3043522]                                          | 3.7                                  | 1.5                                         | 2.6                                           | 3.7                                         | 1.2                                         | 3.1                                         |
| Apol6         | apolipoprotein L 6  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1919189]                                            | 4.1                                  | 1.6                                         | 2.6                                           | 5.1                                         | 1.3                                         | 3.9                                         |
| Ccdc25        | coiled-coil domain  containing 25 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1914429]                              | 2.7                                  | 1.7                                         | 1.6                                           | 2.3                                         | 1.4                                         | 1.6                                         |
| Ctgf          | connective tissue growth  factor [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:95537]                                 | 2.2                                  | 1.3                                         | 1.7                                           | 2.0                                         | 1.3                                         | 1.6                                         |
| Ctrl          | chymotrypsin-like  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:88558]                                               | 2.4                                  | 1.5                                         | 1.6                                           | 2.2                                         | 1.2                                         | 1.9                                         |
| F730043M19Rik | RIKEN cDNA  F730043M19 gene  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:2443237]                                   | 2.2                                  | 1.3                                         | 1.6                                           | 2.1                                         | 1.3                                         | 1.6                                         |
| Gbp8          | guanylate-binding protein  8 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1923324]                                   | 2.7                                  | 1.3                                         | 2.1                                           | 4.5                                         | 1.6                                         | 2.9                                         |
| Gm19263       | predicted gene, 19263                                                                               | 2.4                                  | 1.5                                         | 1.6                                           | 2.7                                         | 1.7                                         | 1.6                                         |
| Gm22079       | predicted gene, 22079  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:5451856]                                         | 3.1                                  | 1.1                                         | 2.8                                           | 3.7                                         | 1.4                                         | 2.6                                         |
| Gpr33         | G protein-coupled  receptor 33 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1277106]  indoleamine 2,3- dioxygenase 1 | 2.1                                  | 1.1                                         | 1.9                                           | 3.6                                         | 1.6                                         | 2.3                                         |
| Ido1          | [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:96416]                                                                  | 10.5                                 | 1.6                                         | 6.6                                           | 12.9                                        | 1.5                                         | 8.8                                         |
| Mela          | melanoma antigen                                                                                    | 3.9                                  | 1.8                                         | 2.2                                           | 3.9                                         | 1.8                                         | 2.2                                         |

Table E1.  Unique transcripts for which the ratio of fold change in Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with WT BM given SP compared to PBS to the fold change in Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with Ifng -/-BM given SP compared to PBS is greater than 1.5.  The bold font identifies genes known to be IFNγ regulated ( www.interferome.org/ ).  n = 4 mice in each group.

| Olfr1395   | olfactory receptor 1395  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3031229]              |   3.8 |   2.0 |   1.9 |   2.5 |   1.6 |   1.6 |
|------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| Pydc3      | pyrin domain containing 3                                                  |   6   |   1   |   5.9 |   3.8 |  -1   |  -3.8 |
| Stxbp5     | syntaxin binding protein 5  (tomosyn) [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1926058] |   2.1 |   1.3 |   1.6 |   2   |   1.3 |   1.5 |
| Traj33     | T cell receptor alpha  joining 33 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:4439590]     |   2.2 |   1.1 |   2   |   3.2 |   1.7 |   1.8 |
| Traj42     | T cell receptor alpha  joining 42 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:4439846]     |   2.7 |   1.5 |   1.8 |   4   |   2   |   2   |
| Traj44     | T cell receptor alpha  joining 44 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:4439850]     |   2.2 |   1.1 |   2   |   4.5 |   1.7 |   2.7 |
| Trgj3      | T cell receptor gamma  joining 3 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:4439528]      |   2.2 |   1.5 |   1.5 |   2.9 |   1.9 |   1.5 |

| Gene Symbol    | Description                                                                       | High dose SP                          | High dose SP                                | High dose SP                                                                   | Low dose SP  SP/PB S fold  Fold  change   | Low dose SP  SP/PB S fold  Fold  change   | Low dose SP  SP/PB S fold  Fold  change                          |
|----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                |                                                                                   | SP/PB S fold  change  in WT  BM  mice | SP/PB S fold  change  in  Ifng -/- BM  mice | Fold  change  in WT  BM mice  with SP  compare d to Ifng- /- BM  mice  with SP | SP/PB S fold  change  in WT  BM  mice     | change  in  Ifng -/- BM  mice             | in WT  BM mice  with SP  compare d to Ifng- /- BM  mice  with SP |
| 1700112E06R ik | RIKEN cDNA  1700112E06 gene  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:19238 83]                | 1.7                                   | -1.1                                        | 2.0                                                                            | 1.7                                       | 1.0                                       | 1.8                                                              |
| 4933412E12R ik | RIKEN cDNA  4933412E12 gene                                                       | 2.4                                   | 1.2                                         | 2.2                                                                            | 2.0                                       | 1.3                                       | 1.7                                                              |
| 9330175E14R ik | RIKEN cDNA  9330175E14 gene  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:24439 13]                | 6.6                                   | 4.7                                         | 1.6                                                                            | 5.5                                       | 4.0                                       | 1.6                                                              |
| AW112010       | expressed sequence  AW112010 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:21477 06]                | 4.2                                   | 2.4                                         | 1.6                                                                            | 4.4                                       | 2.6                                       | 1.6                                                              |
| Gbp5           | guanylate binding  protein 5 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:24299 43]                | 20.2                                  | 11.2                                        | 1.9                                                                            | 18.1                                      | 9.1                                       | 2.1                                                              |
| Iigp1          | interferon inducible  GTPase 1 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:19262 59]              | 6.5                                   | 4.3                                         | 1.8                                                                            | 7.3                                       | 3.7                                       | 2.4                                                              |
| Il18bp         | interleukin 18 binding  protein [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:13338 00]             | 5.8                                   | 3.8                                         | 1.7                                                                            | 5.0                                       | 3.6                                       | 1.6                                                              |
| Irf8           | interferon regulatory  factor 8 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:96395]                | 1.9                                   | 1.1                                         | 1.7                                                                            | 2.0                                       | 1.2                                       | 1.6                                                              |
| Irgm1          | immunity-related  GTPase family M  member 1 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:10756 7]  | 6.4                                   | 4.5                                         | 1.7                                                                            | 5.9                                       | 3.8                                       | 1.9                                                              |
| Irgm2          | immunity-related  GTPase family M  member 2 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:19262 62] | 3.0                                   | 2.4                                         | 1.5                                                                            | 3.1                                       | 2.2                                       | 1.7                                                              |
| Nlrc5          | NLR family, CARD                                                                  | 9.3                                   | 5.3                                         | 2.0                                                                            | 8.3                                       | 5.0                                       | 1.9                                                              |

Table E2.  Transcripts identified by searching for genes expressed 1.5-2.0 fold in Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with WT BM compared with Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with Ifng -/-BM during high dose and low dose S. pneumoniae (SP) pneumonia (adjusted p≤0.05). Genes that have been previously described in the literature as IFN-γ regulated are shown in bold print.

| domain containing 5  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:36121                                           |     |     |     |     |          |             |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|-----|-----|-----|----------|-------------|
| 91]  proteasome (prosome,  macropain) subunit, beta  type 9 (large  multifunctional peptidase  2 | 3.5 | 2   | 1.8 | 3.4 | 2.0  1.7 | Psmb9       |
| transporter 2, ATP- binding cassette, sub- family B (MDR/TAP)  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:      | 2.7 | 1.8 | 1.5 | 2.8 | 1.7  1.7 | Tap2        |
| TAP binding protein-like  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:23848 53]                                  | 3.1 | 2.1 | 1.5 | 3.1 | 1.9      | Tapbpl  1.7 |
| transmembrane protein  140 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:19157 37]                                 | 2.5 | 1.9 | 1.5 | 2.6 | 1.8  1.7 | Tmem140     |
| tryptophanyl-tRNA  synthetase [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:10463 0]                               | 1.9 | 1.3 | 1.6 | 2.2 | 1.3  1.8 | Wars        |

| Gene  Symbol   | Description                                                                                         | High dose SP                          | High dose SP                                | High dose SP                                                | Low dose SP  SP/PBS  Fold             | Low dose SP  SP/PBS  Fold           | Low dose SP  SP/PBS  Fold                             |
|----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
|                |                                                                                                     | SP/PBS  fold  change  in WT  BM  mice | SP/PBS  fold  change  in  Ifng -/- BM  mice | Fold  change in  WT BM  mice  compared  to Ifng-/-  BM mice | SP/PBS  fold  change  in WT  BM  mice | fold  change  in  Ifng -/- BM  mice | change in  WT BM  mice  compared  to Ifng-/-  BM mice |
| Ccl5           | chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 5  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:98262]                                  | 2.5                                   | 2.0                                         | 1.4                                                         | 2.2                                   | 2.6                                 | 1.0                                                   |
| Ciita          | class II transactivator  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:108445]                                        | 1.4                                   | -1.9                                        | 2.4                                                         | 2.1                                   | -1.4                                | 2.5                                                   |
| Gbp10          | guanylate-binding protein 10  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:4359647]  guanylate binding protein 2     | 7.4                                   | 3.1                                         | 3.1                                                         | 8.2                                   | 2.8                                 | 3.8                                                   |
| Gbp2           | [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:102772]  guanylate binding protein 3                                    | 6.6                                   | 5.3                                         | 1.5                                                         | 6.7                                   | 4.3                                 | 1.9                                                   |
| Gbp3           | [Source:MGI  5.4                                                                                    |                                       | 3.8                                         | 1.6                                                         | 4.5                                   | 3.1                                 | 1.6                                                   |
| Gbp4           | [Source:MGI  4.1                                                                                    |                                       | 2.1                                         | 3.1                                                         | 4.8                                   | 1.9                                 | 4.2                                                   |
| Gbp5           | [Source:MGI  20.2                                                                                   |                                       | 11.2                                        | 1.9                                                         | 18.1                                  | 9.1                                 | 2.1                                                   |
| Gbp6           | [Source:MGI  1.8                                                                                    | 1.1                                   |                                             | 1.6                                                         | 1.5                                   | 1.2                                 | 1.2                                                   |
| Gbp7           | guanylate binding protein 7  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:2444421]  3.5  guanylate-binding protein 8 |                                       | 2.6                                         | 1.7                                                         | 3.3                                   | 2.4                                 | 1.7                                                   |
| Gbp8           | [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1923324]  2.7                                                           |                                       | 1.3                                         | 2.2                                                         | 4.5                                   | 1.6                                 | 3.0                                                   |
| Gbp9           | guanylate-binding protein 9  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3605620]                                   | 2.7  2.4                              |                                             | 1.4                                                         | 2.9                                   | 1.9                                 | 1.8                                                   |
| Il12rb1        | interleukin 12 receptor, beta 1  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:104579]                                | 3.0                                   | 1.6                                         | 1.8                                                         | 4.1                                   | 2.4                                 | 1.7                                                   |
| Il23r          | interleukin 23 receptor  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:2181693]                                       | 3.0  2.2                              |                                             | 1.2                                                         | 3.1                                   | 3.0                                 | 1.1                                                   |
| Irf1           | interferon regulatory factor 1                                                                      | 4.1                                   | 2.0                                         | 2.2                                                         | 4.0                                   | 1.6                                 | 2.8                                                   |

Table E3.  IFN-γ inducible genes that contributed to the enrichment score in one or both of the IFN-γ focused GO biological pathways, GO:0034341 and GO:0071346, when comparing Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with WT BM with Ifng -/-mice reconstituted with Ifng -/-BM during high dose S. pneumoniae pneumonia.  The enrichment was highly statistically significant (FDR≤0.0001). Genes in bold print contributed to the enrichment score in both of the GO pathways.

|       | [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:96590]                                               |      |      |     |      |      |     |
|-------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|-----|------|------|-----|
| Irgm2 | immunity-related GTPase  family M member 2  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1926262] |  3   |  2.4 | 1.5 |  3.1 |  2.2 | 1.7 |
| Nlrc5 | NLR family, CARD domain  containing 5 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:3612191]       |  9.3 |  5.3 | 2   |  8.3 |  5   | 1.9 |
| Nos2  | nitric oxide synthase 2,  inducible [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:97361]           | 54.5 | 35.3 | 1.8 | 35.1 | 28.3 | 1.5 |
| Socs1 | suppressor of cytokine  signaling 1 [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:1354910]         | 13.4 |  6.4 | 2.3 | 11.1 |  5   | 2.4 |
| Tgtp1 | T cell specific GTPase 1  [Source:MGI  Symbol;Acc:MGI:98734]                     | 10.9 |  2   | 5.7 | 11.5 |  2.1 | 5.7 |