<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## International Immunopharmacology

j o u r n a l homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/intimp

<!-- image -->

## Titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles induce neutrophil in /uniFB02 ux and local production of several pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory mediators in vivo

## D.M. Gonçalves, D. Girard ⁎

Laboratoire de recherche en in /uniFB02 ammation et physiologie des granulocytes, Université du Québec, INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, Laval, Qc, Canada

## a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:

Received 25 January 2011

Received in revised form 5 March 2011

Accepted 9 March 2011

Available online 21 March 2011

Keywords:

In /uniFB02 ammation

In vivo

Neutrophils

Nanoparticles

Cytokines

Antibody array

We have recently described the in vitro effects of titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles (NPs) in human neutrophils. The objective of the present study was to determine if TiO2 NPs induced leukocyte in /uniFB01 ltration in the in vivo murine air pouch model of acute in /uniFB02 ammation and, if so, to identify which of the main cell populations were attracted. TiO2 NPs induced leukocyte in /uniFB02 ux after 3 -9 h of treatment, since the number of leukocytes attracted signi /uniFB01 cantly increased when compared to controls. Neutrophils are the most abundant leukocytes attracted by TiO2 representing more than ~80% of cells, with the rest being mononuclear cells. Using an antibody array technique to detect 40 different analytes, we observed that TiO2 increased the local production of several analytes in the exudates, including diverse chemokines. Using an ELISA assay, we found that the concentration of TiO2-induced MIP-1 β was signi /uniFB01 cantly increased vs controls, corroborating the antibody array results.

## 1. Introduction

The /uniFB01 eld of nanoscience has witnessed a rapid growth in the last decade. Applications are numerous and include aerospace, defense, national security, electronics, biology and biomedicine [1]. For example, in biomedicine, ' nanoparticle (NP)-oligonucleotide ' hybrids can perform many chemical and biological tasks, including molecule and protein targeting or drug and gene delivery vehicles. These new nanodevices have many novel properties that are valuable for the medical biotechnology sector [2]. Consequently, most researchers working in nanoscience focus mainly on technological applications, rather than on concerns regarding the safety of nanomaterial exposure. In light of this, there has been a recent surge of interest in the expanding /uniFB01 eld of nanotoxicology [3] investigating the safety evaluation of engineered nanostructures and nanodevices [4].

Titanium dioxide (TiO2), an odorless white powder that naturally occurs in minerals such as anatase, rutile, and brookite, is widely used as white pigment for paints, paper, plastic, ceramics, etc. However, TiO2 NPs are transparent at the nanoscale and are able to absorb and re /uniFB02 ect UV light. This explains their usefulness in sunscreens and in solar cells used to make solar panels [3]. At the macrometer scale, TiO2 has always been considered nontoxic and biologically inert [5]. However, at the nanoscale, it has different physical properties. TiO2 has been shown to be able to penetrate skin [6] and catalyze oxidative

© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

damage to DNA in vitro and in vivo [7]. A distribution experiment also revealed that after intraperitoneal injection in mice, TiO2 NPs were retained in multiple organs and tissues, and induced various degrees of organ lesions. [8]. From an in /uniFB02 ammatory perspective, it appears that TiO2 NPs possess pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory properties similar to those exhibited by other nanomaterials. Some pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory effects of TiO2 NPs were observed in vitro in pulmonary cells and in animals following lung instillation. In fact, the vast majority of studies investigating the in /uniFB02 ammatory properties of nanomaterials target pulmonary cells, airways and lungs [5,9 -11]. However, NPs can also gain entry into human systems through ingestion and via dermal routes [6,12]. Curiously, there are few in vivo and in vitro studies interested in cytokine production to assess potential in /uniFB02 ammatory responses following cell stimulation by TiO2. In one report, TiO2 NPs administered intravenously in rats caused no signi /uniFB01 cant chemokine, cytokine or any other parameter of immune modulation variation [12]. In another study, a 24 h treatment of A549 human lung epithelial cells with TiO2 NPs caused a signi /uniFB01 cant increase in interleukin (IL)-8 [11].

It is a well-known fact that polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN) cell numbers increase in TiO2-lung in /uniFB02 ammation in vivo [8,10,13]. However, research on this phenomenon in other tissues is scarce. There is also a lack of literature concerning the role of TiO2 on neutrophil cell physiology, particularly in PMNs of human origin. We have addressed this problem and found that TiO2 exerts important human neutrophil agonistic properties in vitro, including the capacity to induce morphological cell change and phosphorylation events, to delay apoptosis and to increase the production of cytokines and

## a b s t r a c t

chemokines including the potent IL-8 chemokine [14]. The objective of the present study was to determine if TiO2 NPs induced leukocyte in /uniFB01 ltration in the murine air pouch model of acute in /uniFB02 ammation.

## 2. Materials and methods

## 2.1. Nanoparticles

Titanium dioxide ( -) (TiO2) nanoparticles (NPs) were purchased from Vivenano (Toronto, ONT) as an aqueous suspension of TiO2 NPs stabilized by polyacrylate sodium that are stable over a wide range of pH. The particles sizes are 1 -10 nm (90%) as determined by transmission electron microscopy. Structure of the NPs is anatase crystal as con /uniFB01 rmed by X-ray crystallography. They were used as received from the manufacturer without modi /uniFB01 cation.

## 2.2. Murine air pouch model

CD1 female mice, 6 to 8 weeks of age, were obtained from Charles River Laboratories (St-Constant, Canada). On days 0 and 3, mice were anesthetized with isofurane and 3 ml of sterile air was injected subcutaneously, in the back, with a 26-gage needle to form an air pouch as published previously [15 -18] . On day 6, 1 ml of buffer (Ctrl), 100 μ g/ml TiO2 or 1% carrageenan (CRGN) (Sigma-Aldrich, SaintLouis, Missouri) was injected into the air pouch. The concentration of TiO2 used was determined previously by testing the effect of TiO2 NPs in vitro [14]. Mice were killed by CO2 asphyxiation 3, 6, 9, 12 or 24 h after the treatment and the pouches were washed once with 1 ml and then twice with 2 ml of HBSS containing 10 mM EDTA. Exudates were centrifuged at 100× g for 10 min at room temperature and supernatants were collected and stored at -80 °C for further analysis. Cells were resuspended at 0.5×10 6 cells/ml, spread onto microscope slides and stained with Hema-Stain (Fisher Scienti /uniFB01 c, Ottawa, Canada) for identi /uniFB01 cation/quanti /uniFB01 cation of leukocyte cell subpopulation. To further characterize the leukocyte subpopulations, the cells were suspended in PBS containing 5 μ g/ml human IgG for 30 min at 4 °C to block FcRs and then stained for 30 min at 4 °C with FITC-rat anti-mouse F4/80 Ag (rat IgG2b), the FITC-rat anti-mouse neutrophils clone 7/4 (rat IgG2a), or the appropriate FITC-rat IgG negative control (Serotec, Raleigh, NC). Experiments were performed as per protocols approved by Animal Use and Care Committees at INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier.

## 2.3. Cytokine/chemokine protein array

Mouse antibody array kit was purchased from R&amp;D Systems (Minneapolis, MN), and all the steps for the simultaneous detection of 40 analytes were performed as per the manufacturer's recommendation and as previously published [18]. These analytes are listed in the corresponding /uniFB01 gure. We have selected the analytes based on the fact that the kit we used (Mouse cytokine array, panel A array kit) is the one containing the most analytes related to in /uniFB02 ammation. Previous experiments conducted with two membranes probed with the exudates from two different mice treated with lipopolysaccharides revealed that the results were reproducible ( data not shown ). Consequently, we pooled exudates (n ≥ 4 mice) harvested from HBSStreated (Ctrl) or TiO2-induced murine air pouches to probe the membranes, no later than two weeks after the in vivo experiments. The chemiluminescent signal from the bound cytokines/chemokines present in the exudates was detected on Kodak X OMAT-RA /uniFB01 lm. The signal intensity (each analyte was done in duplicate) was normalized to the membrane's positive control. Results are expressed as ratios (fold increased: tested group/control). Ratios ≥ 1.2 were considered slightly positive [18]. Protein array membranes were scanned and densitometry analysis was performed using the Multi-Analyst program (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).

## 2.4. MIP-1 β production

The measurement of MIP-1 β production in the exudates was determined using a commercially available ELISA kit (Medicorp Inc, Montreal, Canada), as per the manufacturer's recommendation.

## 2.5. Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed, using ANOVA (Dunnett multicomparison test) with SigmaStat for Windows (version 3.0). Statistical signi /uniFB01 cance was established at p b 0.05.

## 3. Results

3.1. TiO2 induces leukocyte in /uniFB01 ltration in vivo: predominance of neutrophils

We have routinely used the murine air pouch model to detect leukocyte in /uniFB01 ltration after 6 -9 h of treatment with a variety of compounds, including cytokines [17,18]. Because of this, we initiated a series of experiments in order to determine whether or not TiO2 NPs attract leukocytes into air pouches. As illustrated in Fig. 1A. TiO2 NPs attract an increased number of leukocytes into the air pouch after 9 h in a concentration-dependent fashion. A statistically signi /uniFB01 cant increased number of leukocytes was observed at a concentration of

Fig. 1. TiO2 NPs induce leukocyte recruitment in a concentration-dependent manner in vivo. Murine air pouches were raised before injection of buffer (Ctrl) or an increasing concentration of TiO2 nanoparticles (TiO2) and exudates were harvested after 9 h of treatment. The total number of leukocytes was calculated (A) and the cell populations were identi /uniFB01 ed by cytology (B) as described in Materials and methods. (B). Inset, the vast majority of leukocytes attracted in the pouches are neutrophils (arrows). Few mononuclear cells are also present (arrowhead). Results are means±SEM (n ≥ 4). *P b 0.05 versus Ctrl, by ANOVA. Numbers between parentheses are the number of cells×10 6 .

<!-- image -->

100 (5.3±0.35, mean±SEM; n=4) and 200 (10.4±1.08) vs control (0.67±0.43) but not at 50 (3.4±1.04) μ g/ml TiO2. At higher concentrations, the number of total leukocytes attracted into air pouch starts to decline being non signi /uniFB01 cantly different from controls at 500 μ g/ml TiO2 ( data not shown ). Cytology examinations revealed that the vast majority of cells were PMNs (inset, Fig. 1A; one example at 100 mg/ml TiO2). As illustrated in Fig. 1B, more than ~85% of leukocytes are neutrophils. Based on these results, and since we have previously documented that a concentration of 100 μ g/ml TiO2 strongly activated human neutrophils in vitro [14], we therefore selected this concentration for the rest of our present study.

Wenextperformed experiments in order to determine the kinetics of leukocyte in /uniFB01 ltration and to identify the cell types. As illustrated in Fig. 2A, administration of TiO2 NPs into air pouches caused a rapid accumulation of leukocytes after 3 h of treatment when compared to controls. The maximum level of leukocytes attracted into the pouch by

TiO2 was observed after 6 h of treatment (5.6×10 6 ±1.3 cells). After 9 h, the number of attracted leukocytes started to decline, but the total number of cells was still signi /uniFB01 cantly greater than in controls, and then declined to levels similar to controls over time. In contrast to TiO2, CRGN, known to induce leukocyte in /uniFB02 ux for a longer period of time [19,20], signi /uniFB01 cantly increased the number of cells after 9 h, which increased after 12 h and 24 h. Fig. 2B (upper panel) illustrates that PMNs are the main cell type attracted by TiO2 NPs as identi /uniFB01 ed by cytology. After 3 h, we noted that 80±2% of leukocytes were neutrophils. This proportion was 91±6%, 90±6% and 64±10% after 6, 9, and 12 h, respectively. The remainders of the leukocytes were mononuclear cells and the maximum proportion of mononuclear cells detected never exceeded 36%, a value observed only after 12 h of treatment. Under all conditions, the proportion of lymphocytes and other leukocytes was always b 1% ( data not shown ). Unlike TiO2, CRGN attracted almost the same proportion of PMNs (46±7%)

Fig. 2. TiO2 NPs induce a rapid recruitment of leukocytes in vivo. Murine air pouches were raised before injection of buffer (Ctrl), 100 μ g/ml TiO2 nanoparticles (TiO2) or a solution of 1% carrageenan (CRGN) for the indicated periods of time. Exudates were harvested and the total number of leukocytes was calculated (A) and cell populations were identi /uniFB01 ed by cytology (B and C) and /uniFB02 ow cytometry (inset) as described in Materials and methods. Results are means±SEM (n ≥ 4). *P b 0.05 versus Ctrl, by ANOVA. For clarity, only the results obtained after 3 h and 6 h are illustrated for the identi /uniFB01 cation of cells by /uniFB02 ow cytometry. Numbers between parentheses are the number of cells×10 . 6

<!-- image -->

as mononuclear cells (54±7%) after 3 h (Fig. 2B, bottom panel). Similar results were also observed after 6 h (PMNs, 55±10% and mononuclear cells, 45±10%). As expected, after 9 h and 12 h, the proportion of PMNs increased to 65±2% and 68±10% after 9 h and 12 h, respectively. The cell identi /uniFB01 cation was con /uniFB01 rmed by /uniFB02 ow cytometry using speci /uniFB01 c anti-neutrophil and anti-mononuclear cell antibodies (see inset, Fig. 2B). For clarity, only the results obtained after 3 h and 6 h of treatment are illustrated. However, the cell identi /uniFB01 cation by /uniFB02 ow cytometry was con /uniFB01 rmed for all periods of time and the results correlated with those obtained by cytology ( data not shown ).

3.2. TiO 2 increases the local production of several analytes in the murine air pouch exudates

We next investigated the possibility that the local production of several analytes was increased into TiO2-induced air pouches, using an antibody array method. Typical results obtained on membranes after 3 h of treatment with buffer (upper picture) or TiO2 NPs (bottom picture) are illustrated in Fig. 3A, where the density of several analytes (spots) was increased by TiO2 when compared to controls. For clarity, the raw data obtained after 6 h, 9 h, and 12 h of treatment are not illustrated in this part of the /uniFB01 gure. However, the densities for all analytes and for each periods of time have been calculated and are illustrated in Fig. 3B and Fig. 4.

In Fig. 3B, the number of analytes with a ratio ≥ 1.2, a value considered positive vs controls [14,18,21], as well as with ratios ≥ 2;

Fig. 3. TiO2 NPs increase the local production of several analytes in the murine air pouch exudates as detected by an antibody array method. Aliquots of the exudates used in Fig. 2, were pooled and a fraction of the mixture was used for the detection of several analytes using an antibody array. The ratio for each analyte was calculated as described in Materials and methods. A, raw data obtained on the membranes where almost all spots are increased by 3 h of treatment with TiO2 vs Ctrl. Circles and boxes are the positive and negative controls of the assay. B, the number of analytes was plotted according to the intensity of the ratios subdivided into /uniFB01 ve categories.

<!-- image -->

≥ 5; ≥ 10; and ≥ 15, has been plotted for each period of time. It is clear that the vast majority of analytes with highest ratios were detected after 3 h and 6 h of treatment. The numbers of analytes with high ratios markedly decreased after 9 h of treatment with TiO2 NPs. No analytes were positive (ratio ≥ 1.2) after 12 h. The 40 different analytes tested in this study are listed in Fig. 3. It is clear that the vast majority of the tested analytes were positive after 3 h and 6 h of treatment with TiO2 NPs (panels A and B). Interestingly, several of these analytes are chemokines known to attract leukocytes. The analytes with the greatest ratios in response to TiO2 are the cytokine IL-6 (ratio of 22.8) and the chemokine IP-10 (CXCL-10) (ratio of 22.4) and were observed after 3 h of treatment (panel A). Other analytes with a markedly increased ratio are sICAM-1 (17.3), MIP2 (14.3), and MIG(13.1). Interestingly, among these analytes, only the ratio of IP-10 was maintained with a high value (ratio of 20.4) after 6 h of treatment (panel B). In contrast, only the value of MIG increased from 13.1 (3 h) to 20.1 (6 h). It is important to specify that analytes with a ratio ranging between 2 and 10 also have to be considered as highly expressed. The values of 9.2 and 7.3 for the two potent chemokines MIP-1 α and MIP-1 β (Macrophage In /uniFB02 ammatory Protein-1 alpha/ beta), respectively, have to be mentioned because of their ability to elicit a rapid in /uniFB02 ux of PMNs to the site of injection when administered in vivo [21,22].

3.3. Measurement of the TiO2-induced MIP-1 β concentrations in the exudates

Because of the importance of MIP-1 β in leukocyte in /uniFB01 ltration, and in order to con /uniFB01 rm the data obtained by the antibody array method, wedetermined the concentrations of MIP-1 β by ELISA using the same exudates (not pooled) used for the detection of analytes with the antibody array method. As illustrated in Fig. 5, more than 600 pg/ml of MIP-1 β was measured in the exudates after 3 h of treatment with TiO2; however, the concentration decreased over time. For comparison, the ratio of MIP-1 β detected in the exudates using the antibody array assay is illustrated in the inset of Fig. 5.

## 4. Discussion

Although it is important to fully characterize NPs for some applications, it is clear that when such NPs are administered in vivo, they will be completely different (e.g. formation of aggregates, complex with macromolecules and proteins, etc.). Therefore, we did not characterize further the NPs than the manufacturer. However, we clearly establish that these TiO2 NPs possess in vivo pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory activity since they attract PMNs and, to a lesser extent, mononuclear cells in the murine air pouch model of acute in /uniFB02 ammation. This observation is of interest as it further demonstrates the proin /uniFB02 ammatory activity of TiO2 NPs previously reported almost exclusively in relation to lung in /uniFB02 ammation. The murine air pouch model is a good model for investigating in /uniFB02 ammation occurring in a synoviallike structure [23]. Synovitis is known to occur in association with rheumatic diseases, especially during rheumatoid arthritis, in which leukocyte in /uniFB01 ltration, including a high proportion of PMNs, is observed. To the best of our knowledge, the /uniFB01 rst time this model was employed for an immunotoxicological study was in 2001 in which the organochlorine insecticide dieldrin was found to attract neutrophils [24]. This model is attractive and useful because, in response to a given pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory agent, it permits the recruitment of large number of leukocytes that can be easily collected, counted, subtyped and used in ex vivo experiments. Furthermore, this model is simple, economical, and allows the study of all three phases of acute in /uniFB02 ammation (initiation, ampli /uniFB01 cation, and resolution). Interestingly, TiO2 NPs were found to rapidly induce neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration as soon as 3 h after treatment, and almost 80% of cells attracted were PMNs. Therefore, TiO2 is among the few compounds

Fig. 4. List of the different analytes with their corresponding ratio obtained after the treatment with the TiO2 NPs. The ratio obtained for each analyte is indicated for each period of time after TiO2 NP treatment vs corresponding controls. Filled bars, results with ratios ≥ 1.2 were considered positive; open bars, results considered negative.

<!-- image -->

known to induce a rapid in vivo neutrophil in /uniFB02 ux. Most agents are known to induce a leukocyte in /uniFB02 ux after 6 -9 h of treatment in this model, with a proportion of PMNs varying between about 50 and 90%, depending upon the agent tested. In our hands, we normally observed a neutrophil in /uniFB02 ux after 6 -9 h of treatment with cytokines such as IL-4, IL-15 or IL-21 with the proportion of PMNs ranging from 60 to 80%, the rest being almost exclusively mononuclear cells [17,25]. However, as with other compounds, the leukocyte in /uniFB02 ux started to decline after 9 -12 h of treatment with TiO2 NPs, and reached a basal level similar to control animals. This is in agreement with the in vivo

model, in which most compounds tested induced an accumulation of PMNs followed by an in /uniFB02 ux of mononuclear cells, with complete resolution of cell in /uniFB01 ltration after 24 h. However, some compounds, like CRGN used in the present study, are known to induce a leukocyte in /uniFB02 ux observable after few hours that further increases and is sustained for 24 -48 h [26,27]. Preliminary experiments performed in our laboratory suggest that TiO2 NPs do not increase leukocyte in /uniFB02 ux after 30 min but a clear, although not signi /uniFB01 cant, increase number of leukocytes (almost exclusively PMNs) was observed after 2 h ( data not shown ). Therefore, TiO2 NPs act in the /uniFB01 rst few hours in

Fig. 5. Measurement of the TiO2 NPs-induced MIP-1 β concentrations. Aliquots of the different exudates were used to measure the concentration of MIP-1 β by ELISA. Results are means±SEM (n ≥ 4), by ANOVA. *P b 0.05 versus Ctrl. Inset, results of MIP-1 β ratios obtained by the antibody array method are illustrated.

<!-- image -->

vivo to locally attract PMNs preferentially. The fact that PMNs are targets of TiO2 NPs correlates well with our previous observation that TiO2 NPs can activate human neutrophils in vitro [14].

Administration of TiO2 NPs into the air pouch caused an increased expression of important pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory mediators, including several chemokines. Interestingly, the majority of the analytes were detected after 3 -6 h of treatment with TiO2 NPs, with ratios that were high ( ≥ 10) to very high ( ≥ 15). This is in contrast with IL-4, which increased the expression of only few analytes, as assessed by the antibody array method, where the maximal ratio of ~7 was observed for the MCP-1 (CCL2) chemokine [18]. Although it is not feasible to investigate all known chemokines and cytokines, the assay used in this study provides a tool to study the proin /uniFB02 ammatory activity of TiO2 NPs, and clearly indicates that the mode of action of such NPs in vivo is very complex. This includes the local production of several proin /uniFB02 ammatory mediators such as chemokines. Among these, the chemokines MIP-1 α and MIP-1 β , generally not chemotactic for PMNs in vitro, are known to elicit a rapid in /uniFB02 ux of PMNs to the site of injection when administered in vivo [22]. We are aware that all analytes detected in this study are not necessarily produced by PMNs, but several are known to attract them in vivo. As reported previously, the production of chemokines, including MCP-1, MIP-1 α , RANTES, KC and MIP-2 in the CRGN-induced murine air pouch exudates was found to precede leukocyte in /uniFB01 ltration [26]. Based on the variety of analytes detected in the exudates after 3 h, our results also suggest that TiO2 NPs /uniFB01 rst activate the resident lining cells composed of a variety of tissuein /uniFB01 ltrated in /uniFB02 ammatory cells, including /uniFB01 broblasts, mast cells, mononuclear cells, PMNs, etc.[23]. A proposed model of the mode of action of TiO2 NPs in vivo is illustrated in Fig. 6. Interestingly, preliminary results support this concept that TiO2 NPs attract indirectly neutrophils and mono-mac by /uniFB01 rst activating murine air pouch resident cells, since even after only 30 min of treatment with TiO2 NPs, more than 400 pg/ml of MIP-1 β was measured by ELISA in the exudates, as compared to 30 pg/ml in controls ( data not shown ). Future experiments are needed in order to clearly determine the pro /uniFB01 les and kinetic of analytes present in the exudates of TiO2 NPs-induced air pouch after a short treatment (30 -120 min).

<!-- image -->

24

Fig. 6. Proposed model of TiO2 NPs-induced leukocytes in /uniFB01 ltration in vivo. Following administration, TiO2 NPs activate murine air pouch resident cells that will produce chemokines and other factors. This will then attract some neutrophils into air pouch after 3 h. Then, these neutrophils will produce chemokines and other factors together with those produce by resident cells that will further attract neutrophils and few mononuclear cell peaking at about 9 h in term of number of leukocytes. The number of leukocytes decreases after 12 h reaching levels similar to controls after 24 h, probably by elimination of apoptotic cells by professional phagocytes.

<!-- image -->

According to the results of this study, it is clear that the murine air pouch model is very useful for demonstrating that TiO2 NPs possess pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory activity in vivo. It allows the determination of the kinetics of leukocytes in /uniFB01 ltration, as well as the identi /uniFB01 cation of the subtypes of cells migrating into the pouch. In combination with an antibody array technique, it also allows the detection of several analytes over time to help better understand the mode of action of the NPs. In future, it will be very interesting to determine the potential pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory activity of other NPs in order to classify them according to their degree of pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory activity.

## Acknowledgments

This study was partly supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and Environmental Health Research Network (RRSE) from Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du Québec (FRSQ). DMG holds a Fondation Armand-Frappier M.Sc award. We thank Mary Gregory for reading this manuscript.

## References

- [1] Bellucci S. Nanoparticles and nanodevices in biological applications. Frascati: Springer; 2009.
- [2] Paunesku T, Rajh T, Wiederrecht G, Maser J, Vogt S, Stoji ć evi ć N, et al. Biology of TiO2-oligonucleotide nanocomposites. Nat Mater 2003;2:343 -6.
- [3] Webster TJ. Safety of nanoparticles. Providence, RI: springer; 2009.
- [4] Oberdörster G, Oberdörster E, Oberdörster J. Nanotoxicology: an emerging discipline evolving from studies of ultra /uniFB01 ne particles. Environ Health Perspect 2005;113:823 -39.
- [5] Driscoll KE, Lindenschmidt RC, Maurer JK, Higgins JM, Ridder G. Pulmonary response to silica or titanium dioxide: in /uniFB02 ammatory cells, alveolar macrophagederived cytokines, and histopathology. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1990;2:381 -90.

- [6] Wu J, Liu W, Xue C, Zhou S, Lan F, Bi L, et al. Toxicity and penetration of TiO2 nanoparticles in hairless mice and porcine skin after subchronic dermal exposure. Toxicol Lett 2009;191:1 -8.
- [7] Dunford R, Salinaro A, Cai L, Serpone N, Horikoshi S, Hidaka H, et al. Chemical oxidation and DNA damage catalysed by inorganic sunscreen ingredients. FEBS Lett 1997;418:87 -90.
- [8] ChenJ, Dong X, Zhao J, Tang G. In vivo acute toxicity of titanium dioxide nanoparticles to mice after intraperitioneal injection. J Appl Toxicol 2009;29:330 -7.
- [9] Liao CM, Chiang YH, Chio CP. Model-based assessment for human inhalation exposure risk to airborne nano/ /uniFB01 ne titanium dioxide particles. Sci Total Environ 2008;407:165 -77.
- [10] Rossi EM, Pylkkänen L, Koivisto AJ, Vippola M, Jensen KA, Miettinen M, et al. Airway exposure to silica-coated TiO2 nanoparticles induces pulmonary neutrophilia in mice. Toxicol Sci 2009;113:422 -33.
- [11] Singh S, Shi T, Duf /uniFB01 n R, Albrecht C, van Berlo D, Höhr D, et al. Endocytosis, oxidative stress and IL-8 expression in human lung epithelial cells upon treatment with /uniFB01 ne and ultra /uniFB01 ne TiO2: role of the speci /uniFB01 c surface area and of surface methylation of the particles. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2007;222:141 -51.
- [12] Fabian E, Landsiedel R, Ma-Hock L, Wiench K, Wohlleben W, Van Ravenzwaay B. Tissue distribution and toxicity of intravenously administered titanium dioxide nanoparticles in rats. Arch Toxicol 2008;82:151 -7.
- [13] Hamilton R, Wu N, Porter D, Buford M, Wolfarth M, Holian A. Particle lengthdependent titanium dioxide nanomaterials toxicity and bioactivity. Part Fibre Toxicology 2009;6:35.
- [14] Goncalves DM, Chiasson S, Girard D. Activation of human neutrophils by titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles. Toxicol In Vitro 2010;24:1002 -8.
- [15] Lavastre V, Cavalli H, Ratthe C, Girard D. Anti-in /uniFB02 ammatory effect of Viscum album agglutinin-I (VAA-I): induction of apoptosis in activated neutrophils and inhibition of lipopolysaccharide-induced neutrophilic in /uniFB02 ammation in vivo. Clin Exp Immunol 2004;137:272 -8.
- [16] Pelletier M, Girard D. Biological functions of interleukin-21 and its role in in /uniFB02 ammation. Sci World J 2007;7:1715 -35.

- [17] Pelletier M, Bouchard A, Girard D. In vivo and in vitro roles of IL-21 in in /uniFB02 ammation. J Immunol 2004;173:7521 -30.
- [18] Ratthe C, Ennaciri J, Garces Goncalves DM, Chiasson S, Girard D. Interleukin (IL)-4 induces leukocyte in /uniFB01 ltration in vivo by an indirect mechanism. Mediat In /uniFB02 amm 2009;2009:193970.
- [19] Moisan E, Chiasson S, Girard D. The intriguing normal acute in /uniFB02 ammatory response in mice lacking vimentin. Clin Exp Immunolology 2007;150:158 -68.
- [20] Vigil SVG, de Liz R, Medeiros YS, Fröde TS. Ef /uniFB01 cacy of tacrolimus in inhibiting in /uniFB02 ammation caused by carrageenan in a murine model of air pouch. Transpl Immunol 2008;19:25 -9.
- [21] Alam R, Kumar D, Anderson-Walters D, Forsythe PA. Macrophage in /uniFB02 ammatory protein-1 alpha and monocyte chemoattractant peptide-1 elicit immediate and late cutaneous reactions and activate murine mast cells in vivo. J Immunol 1994;152:1298 -303.
- [22] Wolpe SD, Davatelis G, Sherry B, Beutler B, Hesse DG, Nguyen HT, et al. Macrophages secrete a novel heparin-binding protein with in /uniFB02 ammatory and neutrophil chemokinetic properties. J Exp Med 1988;167:570 -81.
- [23] Sin YM, Sedgwick AD, Chea EP, Willoughby DA. Mast cells in newly formed lining tissue during acute in /uniFB02 ammation: a six day air pouch model in the mouse. Ann Rheum Dis 1986;45:873 -7.
- [24] Pelletier M, Roberge CJ, Gauthier M, Vandal K, Tessier PA, Girard D. Activation of human neutrophils in vitro and dieldrin-induced neutrophilic in /uniFB02 ammation in vivo. J Leukoc Biol 2001;70:367 -73.
- [25] Pelletier M, Girard D. Interleukin-15 increases neutrophil adhesion onto human respiratory epithelial A549 cells and attracts neutrophils in vivo. Clin Exp Immunol 2005;141:315 -25.
- [26] Garcia-Ramallo E, Marques T, Prats N, Beleta J, Kunkel SL, Godessart N. Resident cell chemokine expression serves as the major mechanism for leukocyte recruitment during local in /uniFB02 ammation. J Immunol 2002;169:6467 -73.
- [27] Sin YM, Wong MK. Effect of sodium aurothiomalate on carrageenan induced in /uniFB02 ammation of the air pouch in mice. Ann Rheum Dis 1992;51:112 -6.