<!-- image -->

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Journal of Proteomics

j o u r n a l homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jprot

## Neutrophil proteomic analysis reveals the participation of antioxidant enzymes, motility and ribosomal proteins in the prevention of ischemic effects by preconditioning

S. Arshid a,c,1 , M. Tahir a,b,1 , B. Fontes c , E.F.S. Montero c , M.S. Castro a , S. Sidoli b,d , V. Schwämmle b , P. Roepstorff b , W. Fontes a, ⁎

- a Laboratory of Biochemistry and Protein Chemistry, Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Brasilia, Brasília, DF, Brazil
- b Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, 5230 Odense M, Denmark
- c Laboratory of Surgical Physiopathology (LIM-62), Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, Brazil
- d Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

## a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history: Received 29 January 2016 Accepted 14 May 2016 Available online 18 May 2016

Received in revised form 5 April 2016

Keywords:

Neutrophil

In /uniFB02 ammation

Proteins

Ischemia

Preconditioning

Pathway analysis

## a b s t r a c t

Intestinal ischemia and reperfusion injury are widely used models, which result into tissue injury and multiple organ failure also observed after trauma and surgery. Ischemic preconditioning (IPC) preceding ischemia and reperfusion (IR) was shown to attenuate this injury and has a potential therapeutic application; however the exact underlying mechanism is not clear. Neutrophils play an important role in the mechanism of injuries caused by ischemia and reperfusion while IPC led to a decrease in neutrophil stimulation and activation. The effect of preconditioning on the neutrophil proteome is unclear. Proteomic analysis has been rati /uniFB01 ed as an appropriate tool for studying complex systems. In order to evaluate the effect of IPC preceding 45 min of ischemia on the proteome of neutrophils we used Wistar rats divided in four experimental groups: Control, sham laparotomy, intestinal ischemia reperfusion and ischemic preconditioning. After neutrophil separation, proteins were extracted, trypsin digested and the resulting peptides were iTRAQ labeled followed by HILIC fractionation and nLC-MS/MS analysis. After database searches, normalization and statistical analysis our proteomic analysis resulted in the identi /uniFB01 cation of 2437 protein groups that were assigned to /uniFB01 ve different clusters based on the relative abundance pro /uniFB01 les among the experimental groups. The clustering followed by statistical analysis led to the identi /uniFB01 cation of significantly up and downregulated proteins in IR and IPC. Cluster based KEGG pathways analysis revealed up- regulation of actin cytoskeleton, metabolism, Fc gamma R mediated phagocytosis, chemokine signaling, focal adhesion and leukocyte transendothelial migration whereas downregulation in ribosome, spliceosome, RNA transport, protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum and proteasome, after intestinal ischemic preconditioning. Furthermore, enzyme prediction analysis revealed the regulation of some important antioxidant enzymes and having their role in reactive oxygen species production. To our knowledge, this work describes the most comprehensive and detailed quantitative proteomic study of the neutrophil showing the bene /uniFB01 cial role of ischemic preconditioning and its effects on the neutrophil proteome. This data will be helpful to understand the effect of underlying protective mechanisms modulating the role of PMNs after IPC and provide a trustworthy basis for future studies.

Biological signi /uniFB01 cance: Preconditioning is a relevant strategy to overcome clinical implications from ischemia and reperfusion. Such implications have the neutrophil as a major player. Although many publications describe speci /uniFB01 c biochemical and physiological roles of the neutrophil in such conditions, there is no report of a proteomic study providing a broader view of this scenario. Here we describe a group of proteins signi /uniFB01 cantly regulated by ischemia and reperfusion being such regulation prevented by preconditioning. Such /uniFB01 nding may provide relevant information for a deeper understanding of the mechanisms involved, as well as serve as basis for future biomarker or drug target assays.

© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

## 1. Introduction

Ischemia results into damage to active metabolic tissues whereas reperfusion to this ischemic tissue initiates events that lead to more tissue injury, a phenomenon called ischemic reperfusion injury (IRI)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

[1]. Intestinal IRI is caused by many clinical conditions like acute mesenteric ischemia, intestinal obstruction, incarcerated hernia, small intestine transplantation, neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis, trauma, and shock [2 -4]. Along with local injury it also leads to the development of the systemic in /uniFB02 ammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and multiple organ failure (MOF) [5]. The mechanism of IRI in the intestine is not clear yet but the involvement of PMNs in the pathophysiology of IRI is well documented [6,7] as well as the interactions among leukocytes andendothelial cells [8]. The use of pharmacological strategies to reduce PMNs in /uniFB01 ltration to the intestinal tissue before reperfusion was shown to decrease IRI [9 -11]. The methods to inhibit/limit the effect of IRI have been under extensive research for almost a decade. Several therapeutic modalities have been tested in different animal models but none of them is able to attenuate IRI completely. One of the most studied potential and successful methods is the ischemic preconditioning (IPC) [5].

Ischemic preconditioning (IPC) is de /uniFB01 ned as short episodes of ischemia and reperfusion, before a period of long ischemia and reperfusion, which has been proved to protect organs against both local and systemic IRI [12]. The method introduced by Murry et al. [13] has been tested in both animals and humans involving many organ systems including the intestine [14]. Studies have suggested that the bene /uniFB01 cial effect of IPC occurs by affecting the systemic neutrophil activation [15], complete inhibition of P-selectin expression in the ischemic intestine [16] and prevention of free radical mediated expression of ICAM-1 associated with decreased adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells [17]. IPC also lowered the bacterial translocation [18] and reactive oxygen species production in the intestine [19]. However, the effect of IPC on the neutrophil biology is not clear yet.

Proteomic analysis of rat intestinal mucosa subjected to IRI and IPC has identi /uniFB01 ed few proteins involved in anti-oxidation, anti-apoptosis and energy metabolism revealing a protective role of aldose reductase [20,21]. Initially IPC starts within minutes and leads to changes in specific cell functions, and later results into activation of multiple stress response genes and synthesis of several new proteins in the affected tissue [22,23]. Although the proteome of the intestinal endothelium was characterised, little is known about the neutrophil, an essential partner of the activated endothelium. Therefore we have performed quantitative iTRAQ proteomic analysis in a rat model using nLC-MS/ MS analysis by LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. This study will provide new clues for understanding the effect of IPC as protective against IRI based on the neutrophil proteome.

## 2. Materials and methods

## 2.1. Materials and reagents

Trypsin was from Promega (Madison, WI). Protease Inhibitor Mix and Quant-iT ™ Protein Assay Kit were from GE Healthcare Biosciences (Pittsburgh, USA). TEAB was from Sigma Aldrich -Switzerland. PhosSTOP was from Roche -Germany. DTT and SDS were from GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences (Uppsala, Sweden). Iodoacetamide was from GE Healthcare (Amersham, UK). TSKGel Amide-80 2 mm, 3 μ mparticle size was from Tosoh Bioscience (Stuttgart, Germany). iTRAQ reagents were purchased from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). Vivacon 30 KDa /uniFB01 lters were from Sartorius Stedim Biotech (Goettingen, Germany). Empore C8 extraction disk was obtained from 3 M Bioanalytical Technologies (St. Paul, MN). Poros Oligo R2 and R3 reversed-phase material were obtained from PerSeptive Biosystems (Framingham, MA). TFA was from Fluka (St. Louis, MO). ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 3 μ mmaterial was from Dr. Maisch, (Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). All other solvents and chemicals used in this work were HPLC grade or higher and low-binding polypropylene microtubes for sample preparation procedures were used from Sorenson Bioscience (Salt Lake City, UT).

## 2.2. Experimental design and surgical procedures

Forty male Wistar rats weighing 250 -350 g with no in /uniFB02 ammatory disease were collected from the animal house of the Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo, Brazil. Rats were randomly allocated into four experimental groups with each group having 10 rats. The four experimental groups included the control group (Ctrl, without any surgical procedure); sham laparotomy group (LAP, without clamping of any artery but receiving the same surgical procedure); intestinal ischemia and reperfusion group (IR, subjected to 45 min of superior mesenteric artery occlusion (SMAO) followed by 120 min of reperfusion), and intestinal ischemic preconditioning group (IPC, subjected to 10 min of SMAO followed by 10 min of reperfusion immediately before 45 min of ischemia and 120 min of reperfusion as in IR). All the surgical procedures and samplepreparations were performed in the Laboratory of Surgical Physiopathology (LIM-62), Department of Surgery, FMUSP, according to Fontes et al. [24]. The ethical committee of FMUSP approved the project (Protocol No. 8186). Absence of pre-existing in /uniFB02 ammatory responses was con /uniFB01 rmed before the surgical procedures and sample collection by hemocytometric analysis using granulocytes concentration (%) as selection criterion. About 10 -12 ml of blood was collected from the heart and processed for neutrophil isolation.

## 2.3. Neutrophil separation and protein digestion

For neutrophil separation the collected blood was processed by using the Ficoll gradient protocol [25] with minor modi /uniFB01 cations. Brie /uniFB02 y, the total volume of blood collected from each rat was layered carefully upon an equal volume of Ficoll in a Falcon tube, centrifuged at 400 rcf for 45 min and the supernatant was discarded carefully. The bottom layer rich in RBCs and neutrophils was mixed with 6% dextran solution in 0.15 M of NaCl and the /uniFB01 nal volume was adjusted to 14 ml by adding phosphate buffer saline solution (PBS). The sample was homogenized, mixed gently and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. The upper transparent layer was collected in a fresh falcon tube and centrifuged at 270 rcf for 10 min. Residual RBCs were removed by hypotonic lysis and neutrophils were washed in PBS. The relative purity of the isolated neutrophils was con /uniFB01 rmed to be higher than 96% by light microscopy counting of neutrophils stained using the panoptical method. After counting, 3 × 10 6 neutrophils were tip sonicated in 200 μ l of lysis buffer (2% SDS, 20 mM TEAB, 100 mM DTT and Protease Inhibitor Mix). Following sonication, the protein samples were heated at 80 °C for 10 min in water bath, centrifuged and quanti /uniFB01 ed by using Quant-iT Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scienti /uniFB01 c, MA, USA) and then combined in pools of two, so that samples from ten rats in each group were grouped to /uniFB01 ve biological replicates. Vivacon (Sartorius Stedim, CA, USA) spin /uniFB01 lters of 30 KDa were used to remove SDS from the protein samples according to Wisniewski et al. [26]. The DTT reduced samples were alkylated in 400 μ l of Iodoacetamide solution (50 mM IAA in 1% SDC and 20 mM TEAB solution) for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were washed with 400 μ l of 1% SDC and 20 mM TEAB solution followed by on /uniFB01 lter digestion in 1:50 trypsin to sample ratio in the same washing solution. After overnight digestion, the samples were acidi /uniFB01 ed to a /uniFB01 nal concentration of 0.1% by adding TFA and the /uniFB01 lters with peptides were shifted to new collection tubes, centrifuged at 14,000 rcf for 20 min and the peptides were collected. Peptides were desalted in homemade microcolumns of Poros Oligo R2/ R 3 packed resins (~1 cm long) in p200 tips [27] and quanti /uniFB01 ed by amino acid analysis on a Biochrome 30 amino acid composition analyzer [28].

## 2.4. iTRAQ labeling and peptide fractionation

After the peptide quanti /uniFB01 cation, 100 μ gofpeptide solution was picked from each of the 4 biological conditions for all the 5 biological replicates into a new clean Eppendorf tube. The samples were vacuum dried to label by 4-plex iTRAQ Reagent Kit. The dried peptides were reconstituted

in 20 μ l of dissolution buffer in accordance with manufacturer instructions. Peptides from the control group were labeled with 114, laparotomy with 115, intestinal ischemia and reperfusion with 116 and intestinal ischemic preconditioning with 117. Labeling was con /uniFB01 rmed by MALDI-MS and, after that, the labeled digests were multiplexed in 1:1:1:1 ratio. About 20 μ g of each iTRAQ labeled multiplexed replicate sample was HILIC fractionated into 7 fractions on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system [29]. For fractionation, the lyophilized samples were reconstituted in 90% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA solution and loaded into a TSK-gel Amide 80 HILIC HPLC column (length = 17 cm, particle size 3 μ m). For peptides elution at 6 μ l/min a gradient of 90% ACN/0.1% TFA to 60% ACN/0.1% TFA over 35 min was used. Peptide fractions were collected automatically into a microwell plate at 1 min of interval after UV detection at 210 nm. Collected fractions were combined in 7 fractions based on the uniform distribution of the UV absorbance pattern and lyophilized.

2.5. Reversed phase nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS)

Seven HILIC fractions from each of the 5 biological replicates were analyzed using an Easy-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) coupled online with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scienti /uniFB01 c, Waltham, MA). The labeled peptides from each fraction were loaded onto an 18 cm homemade reversed-phase capillary column (75μ minner diameter) packed with ResiproSil-Pur C18AQ 3- m resin μ (Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The peptides were eluted directly into an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos MS by using a gradient of 180 min from 0 to 34% buffer-A (95% ACN/0.1% formic acid) at 250 nl/min. The MS method was set up in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and a full MS scan in the mass range of 400 -1200 m z / in Orbitrap using a resolution of 30, 000 FWHM (400 m z / ) with target value of 1x10 6 was performed. Each MS scan in the Orbitrap analyzer was followed by MS/MS of the seven most intense ions ( ≥ 2+ charge state) and fragmentation was performed by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) using a resolution of 7,500 [30].

2.6. Database searching and data analysis

The resulting raw /uniFB01 les were viewed in Xcalibur v.2.1 (ThermoScienti /uniFB01 c) and processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) v.1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scienti /uniFB01 c) for database searching and relative quanti /uniFB01 cation. MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt Rodents database (updated November 2013) by using an in-house MASCOT (v2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK) software. The parameters used for database searches were: precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.05 Da; Methionine oxidation, deamidation (NQ), Lysine and peptide N-terminal iTRAQ tagging were set as variable modi /uniFB01 cations, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine residue was selected as /uniFB01 xed modi /uniFB01 cation. Trypsin was selected as digestion enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The number of proteins and protein groups were /uniFB01 ltered for b 1% false discovery rate (1% FDR), using Percolator as validator [31]. A minimum of two peptides per protein was accepted for identi /uniFB01 cation.

Identi /uniFB01 ed proteins were grouped in clusters according to their relative abundance pro /uniFB01 les. For cluster analysis, the mean over all /uniFB01 ve replicated values for each condition was calculated. Two validation indices Xie-Beni index [32] and minimal centroid distance [33] were used to assign the proteins in the best number of clusters in accordance with their expression regulation. After determining the value of the fuzzi /uniFB01 er parameter, fuzzy c -means clustering [34 -36] was applied and the number of clusters was obtained according to Schwämmle [33]. For statistical analysis of the regulated proteins an in house program was developed in R (http://www.r-project.org/), where the iTRAQ intensity values were log-transformed and median normalized for all the /uniFB01 ve biological replicates. For the multiple measurements of the same peptide one peptide measurement was allowed in R Rollup function of DanteR [37]. The

peptide values were converted into protein quantitation using the mean of a minimumof two peptides per protein identi /uniFB01 cation. The Limma test [38] and rank products [39] were used as they are more powerful in dealing with low replicate numbers and higher percentage of missing values [40]. These statistical tests were applied on all protein ratios against label 114 (control) and corrected for multiple testing [41]. From both statistical analysis, proteins with q-values b 0.05 were considered regulated.

ProteinCenter (Thermo Scienti /uniFB01 c, Waltham, USA) was used to interpret the results at protein level, like, GO Slim classi /uniFB01 cation with 5% false discovery rate (FDR). Prediction of enzyme activity and classi /uniFB01 cation (EnzymeCommission (EC) numbers) of the identi /uniFB01 ed proteins was carried out by using UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/). KEGG pathways analysis was acquired by using WebGestalt with default parameters using Rattus norvegicus genomeasreference set for enrichment analysis from KEEG pathways [42] whereas protein-protein interaction networks analysis were acquired by String 10 with highest con /uniFB01 dence score (0.900) [43].

Data Availability -Mass spectrometer output /uniFB01 les (Raw data), peptide and protein identi /uniFB01 cation /uniFB01 les (MSF and XLS /uniFB01 les) have been deposited in a public repository, the PeptideAtlas database (https://db. systemsbiology.net/sbeams/cgi/PeptideAtlas/PASS\_View?identi /uniFB01 er= PASS00798), under the dataset tag neutrophil\_IPC and database identi/uniFB01 er PASS00798.

## 3. Results and discussion

For the comprehensive proteomic analysis of rat neutrophils, the 40 rats were selected after haematological analysis (data not shown) and randomly allocated into 4 groups. The neutrophils were isolated and the proteins extracted from two rats of the same group were pooled to a total of 5 replicates in each group. All the 20 replicates were digested, iTRAQ labeled, HILIC fractionated and then subjected to nLCMS/MSanalysis(Fig. 1). The list of identi /uniFB01 edandiTRAQlabeledpeptides provided a total of 2437 protein groups in all conditions. The Principal component analysis showed that the variability among replicates was less than that among the different conditions showing relatively good reproducibility in each condition (Supplementary Fig. 1).

Twovalidation indices (minimal centroid distance [33] and Xie-Beni index [44] were subsequently applied to de /uniFB01 ne and visualize the significant protein clusters. The resulting /uniFB01 ve clusters with different abundance pro /uniFB01 les are shown in Fig. 2, along with detailed statistical information in Supplementary Table 1. Clusters 1 -5 consisted of 570, 402, 484, 444, and 537 protein groups respectively, with no overlapping. Clusters 2 and 3 are representing the proteins with continuous increasing and decreasing relative abundance pro /uniFB01 les respectively that can be correlated to the continuous severity in surgical procedures whereas cluster 1 showed only difference in IPC as compared to the Ctrl, LAP and IR. Fig. 2 shows that a pro /uniFB01 le representing differences in relative abundance between IR and IPC groups with less difference among Ctrl, LAP and IPC groups is present in clusters 4 and 5, suggesting the two clusters with IPC responsive proteins. In that sense, proteins from clusters 4 and 5 had their abundance pro /uniFB01 le re /uniFB02 ecting the preventive effect of IPC over IR and were chosen for a more detailed discussion. There are signi /uniFB01 cant differences between the Ctrl and LAP groups, indicating an in /uniFB02 uence of early surgical trauma on circulating neutrophils. Enzymes regulated by this process are related to apoptosis, chemotaxis and cell migration.

The complete list of proteins, their respective peptides, statistical signi /uniFB01 cance and replicates where they were identi /uniFB01 ed can be found in Supplementary Table 2. For the functional classi /uniFB01 cation of the proteins in clusters 4 and 5 we used ProteinCenter for the gene ontology (GO) analysis and UniProt to retrieve enzyme activity prediction, as well as WebGestalt to /uniFB01 nd enriched pathways in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database [42].

## Experimental Groups

Fig. 1. Experimental work /uniFB02 owforthequantitative analysis of neutrophil proteome. Control (Ctrl) sample was labeled with 114, laparotomy (LAP) with 115, ischemia reperfusion (IR) with 116 and ischemic preconditioning (IPC) with 117.

<!-- image -->

## 3.1. Gene ontology of protein groups from clusters 4 and 5

Analysis of the GO terms of the protein groups from clusters 4 and 5 is shown in Fig. 3. Distribution of GO terms for cellular component (Fig. 3A) showed great diversity of protein groups in their cellular localization although the shifts in protein localization in the neutrophil were not monitored. The major difference in relative abundance in both clusters was noticed among the proteins annotated to cytoplasm, membrane, cytoskeleton, nucleus, organelle lumen and ribosome. It has been studied that limited oxygen availability (hypoxia) during IR impairs the endothelial cell barrier function and such impairment occurs [45] due to a decrease in mitochondrial activity and a concomitant increase in both vascular permeability and leakage [46]. Fig. 3A shows 119 proteins (58 in cluster 4, 61 in cluster 5) presenting a relative abundancepro /uniFB01 le that suggests in /uniFB02 uence of the mitochondrial protein distribution pattern in preventing the IR alterations in neutrophils. Although mature neutrophils possess few mitochondria, having limited role in cellular function [47], and low rate of mitochondrial respiration [48],

there are evidences showing the participation of mitochondrial proteins in the in /uniFB02 ammatory response [49]. Neutrophils are highly motile cells due to the presence of a complex network of three cytosolic /uniFB01 bers namely micro /uniFB01 laments, intermediate /uniFB01 laments and microtubules in cytoskeleton. Studies have shown that actin /uniFB01 bers participate in neutrophil motility and the regulation of receptor af /uniFB01 nity, apoptosis, cell cycle and signaling to the nucleus [50 -52]. The proteins from cluster 5 annotated to cytoplasm, nucleus, organelle lumen and ribosome are upregulated in IR in accordance with the activation of the transcriptional and translational machinery whereas IPC prevents such upregulation. Fig. 3B shows the GO slim terms for biological activity with major differences in processes like metabolic, cell communication, stimuli response and transport however GOs slim for molecular function Fig. 3C indicates that most differences are found in transcriptional and translational activity including DNA, RNA, nucleotide and metal ion binding, structural molecules and catalytic activity. It is clear from the GO analysis that IR and IPC affect the cellular functions [53] along with activation of multiple response genes and de novo protein synthesis [22] in PMNs.

Fig. 2. Expression pro /uniFB01 le of regulated proteins during Ctrl, LAP, IR and IPC. All the identi /uniFB01 ed proteins were grouped in 5 clusters.

<!-- image -->

activity

activity

activity

catalytic -

binding

DNA

enzyme

1

Fig. 3. GOslimtermsofproteinswith differential regulation level in in clusters 4 and 5. GO slim cellular component (A), Biological activity (B), and Molecular function (C). Y-axis represents the number of occurrences of each GO slim term.

<!-- image -->

1

activity

cellular

cellular

activity

binding

motor

defense

binding

nucleotide

binding

{

metabolic

response

1

activity

activity

binding

activity

1

RNA

molecule

transducer

translation

'activity

transporter

1

1

## 3.2. Pathway analysis for cluster 4

All the signi /uniFB01 cantly regulated proteins from cluster 4 were analyzed for the KEGG pathways for top ten functional categories (Supplementary Table 1) and the pathways found include: regulation of actin cytoskeleton, metabolic pathways, Fc gamma R mediated phagocytosis, chemokine signaling, focal adhesion and leukocyte transendothelial migration. Such /uniFB01 ndings are in accordance with the GO analysis. The regulation of actin cytoskeleton was classi /uniFB01 ed with the highest p-value and contains 15 proteins with signi /uniFB01 cant regulation. It is clear from the literature that the production of chemoattractant molecules (C5a, IL-8, LTB4, PAF) from in /uniFB02 ammatory cells is altered during IR, along with the induction of various adhesion molecules onto the surface of both in /uniFB02 ammatory cells and endothelial cells (ECs). The adhesion molecules regulating the leukocyte-endothelium interaction are the selectins, β 2 integrins (CD11/CD18) expressed on neutrophils and the immunoglobulins

(ICAM-1, VCAM-1, PECAM-1) on ECs [54]. Integrin alpha M (P05555) and integrin β 2 (P11835) were found among the regulated proteins, interestingly integrin β 2 (CD11b/CD18) was found regulated in three comparisons (Ctrl vs IR, LAP vs IR and IR vs IPC). The increase in β 2integrin expression on neutrophil after hypoxia was shown by in vitro studies and later administration of anti-CD11b or anti-CD18 monoclonal antibodies in rats. Such studies also con /uniFB01 rmed reduced infarct volumes and apoptosis with decreased accumulation of neutrophils in vivo [55,56] however clinical studies using anti-integrin therapies with antibodies against CD11/CD18 in acute stroke patients did not show clinical improvement [57]. Another protein from this pathway also found regulated in three comparisons was the IQ motif containing GTPase activating protein 1 (IQGAP1/Q9JKF1), a major scaffolding protein involved in cytoskeletal organization and signaling. It is an essential component of the CXCR2 ' chemosynapse ' in human neutrophils and the knock-down of IQGAP1 inhibited CXCR2 mediated chemotaxis

antioxidant

[58]. Other regulated proteins in this pathway are p21 protein (Cdc42/ Rac)-activated kinase 2 (Pak2), pro /uniFB01 lin 1 (Pfn1), cytoplasmic FMR1 interacting protein 2 (Cy /uniFB01 p2), Nonmuscle myosin IIA (Myh9/14), actinin (Actn1), neuroblastoma ras oncogene (Nras), Rho-family GTPases like Rac2 and RhoA, phosphatidylinositol-5-phosphate 4kinase (Pip4k2a), WAS protein family (Wasf2) and ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (Kras). Most of these are important players of other pathways like Fc gamma R mediated Phagocytosis, chemokine signaling, focal adhesion and leukocyte trans -endothelial migration. For example p21-activated kinase (PAK2) inhibition altered the subcellular localization of active RhoA, loss of directionality, increased spreading and decreased migration speed [59]. The de /uniFB01 ciency of non-muscle myosin IIA (MYH9) in T-cells decreased interstitial migration, caused over adherence to high endothelial venules and inef /uniFB01 -cient completion of recirculation through lymph nodes [60] whereas its upregulation in neutrophils suggests a functional role in the directional migration of immune cells [61]. Rac2 is a member of the Rho family of GTPases that regulates the actin cytoskeleton and superoxide production. Decreased levels of Rac2 are associated with the immunode /uniFB01 ciency syndrome in male patients [62]. Many studies investigating the role of intestinal IPC showed attenuated neutrophil sequestration and endothelial cell apoptosis, decrease in the production of in /uniFB02 ammatory mediators like tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α and interleukin-1, with decreased expression of adhesion molecules as ICAM-1 and VCAM-1onECs[63]. However, the effect of IPC on the neutrophil proteome was not characterised. Pathway analysis for cluster 4 showed that most of the proteins down regulated are involved in modulation of phagocytosis, morphological changes in neutrophils, cytoskeletal machinery, adhesion, and directional migration after IR. This can further cause multiple tissue in /uniFB01 ltration of these neutrophils in any organ leading to immunode /uniFB01 ciency with higher infection rate, acute lung injury (ALI) and multiple organ failure (MOF) after IR. The cluster 4 showed upregulation of these proteins in Ctrl and LAP and a similar upregulation of such proteins by IPC could improve neutrophil function. In the present study we focused on the circulating PMNs. It is known that the circulating pool may contain different subpopulations of neutrophils including small percentages of TEM (transendothelial migrated) neutrophils reentered in blood and promoting recirculation of tissue experienced neutrophils (reverse TEM) [64]. Even though, the main idea in this publication was to focus on PMNs in early activation events affecting the proteins from various pathways. Therefore, future studies analysing PMNs that have localized to the tissue would more likely show changes in proteins regulating downstream these pathways, such as degranulation and apoptosis.

There were 54 proteins from metabolic pathways found to follow the abundance pro /uniFB01 le of cluster 4, out of which 20 were regulated, participating mainly in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, amino sugar and nucleotide, fructose, mannose, galactose and purine metabolism (Supplementary Table 1). In response to an underlying pathological condition and metabolic stress, neutrophils change bioenergetics in accordance with the changes in their biological functions [65]. Normally glycolysis provides energy requirements for neutrophil chemotaxis [47]. However, little is known regarding the regulatory role of glycolysis under normal and pathological conditions in these cells. Glycolytic enzyme, hexokinase 3 ( HK3 ), was signi /uniFB01 cantly down and upregulated after IR and IPC respectively. It was also signi /uniFB01 cantly decreased in acute myeloid leukemia patients as compared to normal granulocytes suggesting a role in neutrophil differentiation [66]. Two proteins that belong to the family of lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferases (P0C1Q3) involved in phospholipid metabolism and platelet-activating factor (PAF) biosynthesis were found regulated in all three conditions. Ten proteins were found upregulated in IR vs IPC including Peroxiredoxin-6 (EC 1.11.1.15) which acts as antioxidant by reducing damage caused by ROS/H2O2 in tissues whereas its translocation to the plasma membrane during neutrophil activation was required for optimal NADPH oxidase activity [67,68]. The IPC has an important role

in the modulation of neutrophils bioenergetics, which is clear from the change in regulation of many proteins involved in metabolism.

## 3.3. Pathway analysis for cluster 5

KEGG pathway analysis of the differentially regulated proteins in cluster 5 revealed ribosome, spliceosome, RNA transport, protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, proteasome, DNA replication, RNA transport and some metabolic pathways. Several pathways identi /uniFB01 ed by KEGG analysis of regulated proteins overlapped with the GO analysis of the proteins for cluster 5. In particular, the ribosome pathway is the most prominent in the two analyses. This /uniFB01 nding suggests that the response of neutrophils to IR affects the upregulation of transcription, translation, protein folding, sorting and degradation processes in cells along with the replication and metabolism. Interestingly 62 proteins out of 63 were found signi /uniFB01 cantly regulated in cluster 5. All these processes are required for the in /uniFB02 ammatoryresponse of neutrophils during IR and were found to be unregulated as compared to Ctrl and LAP PMNs whereas these pathways were downregulated in neutrophils from the IPC group showing the effect of IPC on neutrophil having similar behaviour as in control and LAP PMNs.

Ribosomal proteins are also fundamental components in the cellular metabolism, ribosome synthesis, cell growth and development [1]. Some of these ribosomal proteins have some extraribosomal activities including catalytic functions replication, transcription, RNA processing, DNArepair, and even in in /uniFB02 ammation [69]. There are 18 ribosomal proteins found upregulated by IR as compared to Ctrl/ LAP and downregulated by IPC as compared to IR, including 40S ribosomal proteins; Rps3a, Rps3, Rps8, Rps9, Rps11, Rps15, Rps23, Rps27, Rps28, Rps29, and 60S ribosomal proteins Rpl10a, Rpl11, Rpl15, Rpl24, Rpl26, Rpl27, Rpl36a, Rpl35. Recently activated protein synthesis has been noticed in activated human PMNs after trauma [70,71]. Our /uniFB01 ndings indicate the activation of protein biosynthesis in PMNs under oxidative stress while preconditioning resulted in decreased protein synthesis [72].

## 3.4. String analysis for cluster 4 and 5

STRING v9.1 with highest con /uniFB01 dence score (0.900) [73] was used to check for protein-protein interactions of all the proteins identi /uniFB01 ed in both the clusters. Fig. 4A and B shows the results that are in accordance with the Pathway and GO analysis highlighting different groups of protein-protein interactions in both clusters. The Fig. 4A shows that the most interacting proteins (i.e. the proteins that present the highest number of interactions) in cluster 4 are rac2 and Rhoa (Rho-family GTPase) are found signi /uniFB01 cantly downregulated in IPC vs IR and are important regulators of motility and cell shape [74]. Fig. 4B shows analysis from cluster 5 highlighting some of the most interacting proteins Rps27, Eftud2, Hnrpd and Hsp90aa1 that are part of ribosome, spliceosome and endoplasmic reticulum processing respectively. Interestingly Rps27 and Hsp90aa1 were found regulated among all conditions, with upregulation from Ctrl/LAP vs IR and then downregulation from IR vs IPC, whereas Eftud2 was found also downregulated from IR vs IPC.

## 3.5. Enzyme prediction for clusters 4 and 5

To predict the enzymatic activity of the signi /uniFB01 cantly regulated proteins in both clusters, Enzyme Commission numbers were retrieved from the online UniProt database service Table 1. The proteins classi /uniFB01 ed to oxidoreductases, transferases and hydrolyses were found abundant in cluster 4 and isomerases and ligases in cluster 5 respectively (Fig. 5). The predicted enzymes are involved in carbohydrate metabolism and oxidation of fatty acid and aldehydes, with some interesting antioxidants e.g.; peroxiredoxin-6 (1.11.1.15), glutathione peroxidase (1.11.1.9), and methionine sulfoxide reductase (1.8.4.11) in cluster 4 and superoxide dismutase (1.15.1.1) in cluster 5.

The generated ROS help in pathogen clearance, however, excessively produced superoxide damages the surrounding tissues. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) converts the superoxide radical to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and molecular oxygen [75]. H2O2 is detoxi /uniFB01 ed by peroxidases such as, glutathione peroxidase (GPX) [76], peroxiredoxin (PRDX) [77] and methionine sulfoxide reductase A [78]. Reperfusion injury is directly related to the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), endothelial cell injury, increased vascular permeability, and the activation of neutrophils and platelets, cytokines, and the complement system [79]. Peroxiredoxin 6 was recently found in neutrophils as a 29 kDa protein that showed an additional biochemical role having a phospholipase A2 (PLA2) activity, and enhancing NADPH oxidase activity in phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) stimulated neutrophils [67]. A decrease in antioxidant activity in IR neutrophils could lead to higher ROS production further contributing to tissue injury after IR. Our data show that IR and IPC alter the regulation of these antioxidant enzymes in neutrophils that can lead to a difference in the level of injury produced in both situations suggesting regulation of antioxidant mechanisms in neutrophils as one of the protective players after preconditioning.

Many non-speci /uniFB01 c serine/threonine (2.7.11.1) and protein-tyrosine kinases (2.7.10.2) were found as regulated among the transferases of cluster 4. Another transferase found as regulated from platelet-activating factor (PAF) remodelling pathway/de novo synthesis was acetyl-CoA:lysoPAF acetyl transferase and annotated as LysoPAFAT/LPCAT2 (EC2.3.1.67/ EC 2.3.1.23). During acute in /uniFB02 ammation or oxidative stress like IR injury, PAF is produced and released by neutrophils, monocytes and endothelial

cells [80,81]. The regulation of PAF synthesis, coordinated actions, regulatory roles, and the upstream signals of these enzymes are not well characterised in the neutrophil. Our data suggest that stimuli from IR and IPC may regulate the PAF remodelling pathway in neutrophils.

A downregulated (in IPC vs IR) hydrolase is dynamin-2/Dynamin GTPase (3.6.5.5) that further regulates endocytosis and /uniFB01 ssion of endocytic vesicles required for cytonemes formation, a mechanism of secretion for intercellular communication over short distances without affecting the surrounding tissues [82]. Downregulation of dynamin might impair the membrane fusion/ /uniFB01 ssion events and could be a key element in cytoneme formation [83], affecting the neutrophil communication after IR. Regulated hydrolases encountered in cluster 5 include (3.6.4.12) DNA helicases (DNA replication licensing factor MCM2-7 complex) and (3.6.4.13) RNA helicases, related to helicase activation and RNA/DNA unwinding [84]. Interestingly neutrophils do not exhibit DNA replication but DNA possesses a rapid bactericidal activity when exported to the NET formation.

Most regulated isomerases in cluster 5 were annotated as Protein disul /uniFB01 de isomerase/Pin1 (5.3.4.1) and Peptidylprolyl isomerase, PPIases (5.2.1.8). Both are involved in protein modi /uniFB01 cations that have a critical role in the protein folding process, and are involved in disul /uniFB01 debondsformation and cis -trans isomerization of peptide bonds. Although Pin1 and PPIases also play a critical role in regulatory mechanisms of cellular function and pathophysiology of disease [85], their role in pathophysiology of IPC in the neutrophil is not clear and could be further investigated in future studies.

Fig. 4. (A) Protein-protein interaction analysis of cluster 4 highlighting protein networks involved in chemokine, adhesion and leukocyte transendothelial migration (blue), regulation of actin cytoskeleton (orange) and metabolic pathways (purple). (B) Protein-protein interaction analysis of cluster 5 highlighting protein networks involved in Ribosome (green), proteasome (blue), spliceosome (yellow), RNA transport (orange), DNA replication (purple), and endoplasmic reticulum (red). Thicker, blue and black lines indicate more con /uniFB01 dent binding and reaction associations respectively.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4 ( continued ).

<!-- image -->

In cluster 5 there were 7 ligases that were regulated and mostly involved in protein modi /uniFB01 cations like ubiquitination and sumoylation. The argininosuccinate synthase (ASS) (6.3.4.5) is an enzyme of the urea and nitric oxide (NO·) cycles and its overexpression leads to enhanced NO·generation (nitrosative stress) further implicated in epithelial cell injury, apoptosis, host immune defense, and perpetuation of the in /uniFB02 ammatory response in the liver [86]. It's signi /uniFB01 cant upregulation after IR could increase NO· generation by neutrophil while downregulation could be one of the protective mechanisms after IPC.

## 4. Conclusion

Our study is the most comprehensive proteomic analysis revealing the effect of ischemic preconditioning on the proteome of neutrophils activated by ischemia/reperfusion. A large set of proteins was found

diferentially regulated between both conditions. The regulation of proteins following the cluster 4 pattern (downregulated in IR vs. IPC) suggests neutrophils with disruption in the cytoskeletal machinery leading to altered adhesion, directional migration, and phagocytosis. This can further cause multiple tissue in /uniFB01 ltration of these neutrophils in any organ leading to immunode /uniFB01 ciency with higher infection rate, acute lung injury (ALI) and multiple organ failure (MOF) after IR. However, the prevention of such regulation by IPC could improve neutrophil function. Similarly, the activation of protein biosynthesis in PMNs under oxidative stress was found upregulated by IR vs. Ctrl/LAP while preconditioning resulted in decrease in protein synthesis by affecting the ribosome, spliceosome, RNAtransport, protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, proteasome and RNA transport. Enzymatic activity prediction for clusters 4 and 5 suggested the importance of some antioxidant enzymes like peroxiredoxin6, glutathione peroxidase, methionine sulfoxide reductase, superoxide

Predicted enzyme activities of the quanti ed proteins in clusters 4 and 5.

Table 1 /uniFB01

| EC number                                                                                                                                                                | Protein ID                                                                                                                                                               | Description                                                                                                                                                                                  | Cluster                                                                                                                                                                  | Gene symbol                                                                                                                                                              |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Oxidoreductases 1.1.1.14 P27867 Sorbitol dehydrogenase (carbohydrate metabolism) 4 Sord 1.1.1.271 P23591 GDP-L-fucose synthase (fructose and mannose metabolism) 4 Tsta3 | Oxidoreductases 1.1.1.14 P27867 Sorbitol dehydrogenase (carbohydrate metabolism) 4 Sord 1.1.1.271 P23591 GDP-L-fucose synthase (fructose and mannose metabolism) 4 Tsta3 | Oxidoreductases 1.1.1.14 P27867 Sorbitol dehydrogenase (carbohydrate metabolism) 4 Sord 1.1.1.271 P23591 GDP-L-fucose synthase (fructose and mannose metabolism) 4 Tsta3                     | Oxidoreductases 1.1.1.14 P27867 Sorbitol dehydrogenase (carbohydrate metabolism) 4 Sord 1.1.1.271 P23591 GDP-L-fucose synthase (fructose and mannose metabolism) 4 Tsta3 | Oxidoreductases 1.1.1.14 P27867 Sorbitol dehydrogenase (carbohydrate metabolism) 4 Sord 1.1.1.271 P23591 GDP-L-fucose synthase (fructose and mannose metabolism) 4 Tsta3 |
| 1.11.1.15                                                                                                                                                                | O35244                                                                                                                                                                   | Peroxiredoxin-6 (antioxidant)                                                                                                                                                                | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Prdx6                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 1.11.1.9                                                                                                                                                                 | P04041                                                                                                                                                                   | Glutathione peroxidase 1                                                                                                                                                                     | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Gpx1                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 1.11.1.9                                                                                                                                                                 | O35244                                                                                                                                                                   | Glutathione peroxidase 1                                                                                                                                                                     | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Prdx6                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 1.11.2.2                                                                                                                                                                 | P11247                                                                                                                                                                   | Myeloperoxidase                                                                                                                                                                              | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Mpo                                                                                                                                                                      |
| 1.2.1.5                                                                                                                                                                  | Q5XI42                                                                                                                                                                   | Aldehyde dehydrogenase family 3 member B1 (oxidation of aldehydes)                                                                                                                           | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Aldh3b1                                                                                                                                                                  |
| 1.3.3.6                                                                                                                                                                  | P07872                                                                                                                                                                   | Peroxisomal acyl-coenzyme A oxidase 1 (fatty acid oxidation) mitochondrial peptide methionine sulfoxide reductase                                                                            | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Acox1                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 1.8.4.11                                                                                                                                                                 | Q923M1                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                              | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Msra                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 1.1.1.27                                                                                                                                                                 | P04642                                                                                                                                                                   | L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain (tissue damage) pyruvate to lactate in absence of oxygen                                                                                                     | 5                                                                                                                                                                        | Ldha                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 1.15.1.1                                                                                                                                                                 | P07632                                                                                                                                                                   | Superoxide dismutase [Cu \ \ Zn]                                                                                                                                                             | 5                                                                                                                                                                        | Sod1                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 1.2.1.3                                                                                                                                                                  | P47738                                                                                                                                                                   | Aldehyde dehydrogenase, mitochondrial precursor                                                                                                                                              | 5                                                                                                                                                                        | Aldh2                                                                                                                                                                    |
|                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          | Dihydrofolate reductase                                                                                                                                                                      | 5                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 1.5.1.3                                                                                                                                                                  | Q920D2                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          | Dhfr                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Transferases                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 2.1.1.77                                                                                                                                                                 | P22062                                                                                                                                                                   | protein-L-isoaspartate(D-aspartate) O -methyltransferase                                                                                                                                     | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Pcmt1                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 2.3.1.67                                                                                                                                                                 | Q8BYI6                                                                                                                                                                   | Lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 2 fatty acid metabolism/1-acylglycerophosphocholine O -acyltransferase                                                                               | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Lpcat2                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 2.3.1.67                                                                                                                                                                 | Q8BYI6                                                                                                                                                                   | Lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 2 fatty acid metabolism/1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate O -acyltransferase                                                                                | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Lpcat2                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 2.3.1.67                                                                                                                                                                 | Q8BYI6                                                                                                                                                                   | Lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 2 lipid formation/1-alkylglycerophosphocholine O -acetyltransferase Glycogen phosphorylase, liver form degradation of large branched glycan polymers | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Lpcat2 Pygl                                                                                                                                                              |
| 2.4.1.1                                                                                                                                                                  | P09811                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                              | 4                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 2.4.1.186                                                                                                                                                                | O08730                                                                                                                                                                   | Glycogenin-1 glucosylation Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase                                                                                                                    | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Gyg1                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 2.4.2.8                                                                                                                                                                  | Q64531                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                              | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Hprt1 Hk3                                                                                                                                                                |
| 2.7.1.1                                                                                                                                                                  | P27926                                                                                                                                                                   | Hexokinase-3                                                                                                                                                                                 | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Pip4k2a                                                                                                                                                                  |
| 2.7.1.149 2.7.1.40                                                                                                                                                       | Q9R0I8                                                                                                                                                                   | Phosphatidylinositol 5-phosphate 4-kinase type-2 alpha                                                                                                                                       | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Pkm                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                                                                                                                                                                          | P11980                                                                                                                                                                   | Pyruvate kinase PKM Tyrosine-protein kinase Fgr Non-speci /uniFB01 c protein-tyrosine kinase                                                                                                 | 4                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 2.7.10.2                                                                                                                                                                 | Q6P6U0 Q63184                                                                                                                                                            | Interferon-induced, double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase non-speci /uniFB01 c protein-tyrosine kinase                                                                                | 4 4                                                                                                                                                                      | Fgr Eif2ak2                                                                                                                                                              |
| 2.7.10.2 2.7.11.1                                                                                                                                                        | P54645 Q6P9R2                                                                                                                                                            | 5 -AMP-activated protein kinase catalytic subunit alpha-1 non-speci ' /uniFB01 c serine/threonine protein kinase Serine/threonine-protein kinase OSR1                                        | 4 4                                                                                                                                                                      | Prkaa1                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 2.7.11.1                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                          | Serine/threonine-protein kinase 4                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                          | Oxsr1                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 2.7.11.1 2.7.11.1                                                                                                                                                        | Q9JI11 Q63184                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                              | 4 4                                                                                                                                                                      | Stk4                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          | Interferon-induced, double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase Serine/threonine-protein kinase PAK 2                                                                                       | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Eif2ak2 Pak2                                                                                                                                                             |
| 2.7.11.1                                                                                                                                                                 | Q64303                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                              | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Prkcd                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 2.7.11.13 2.7.11.26                                                                                                                                                      | P09215 P54645                                                                                                                                                            | Protein kinase C delta type '                                                                                                                                                                | 4                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                                          | P54645                                                                                                                                                                   | 5 -AMP-activated protein kinase catalytic subunit alpha-1                                                                                                                                    | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Prkaa1                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 2.7.11.27 2.7.11.31                                                                                                                                                      | P54645 Q91ZJ5                                                                                                                                                            | 5 -AMP-activated protein kinase catalytic subunit alpha-1 ' 5 -AMP-activated protein kinase catalytic subunit alpha-1 '                                                                      | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Prkaa1 Prkaa1                                                                                                                                                            |
| 2.7.7.9                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                          | UTP glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase isoform 1 -                                                                                                                                      | 4                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 2.3.1.176                                                                                                                                                                | P11915                                                                                                                                                                   | Propanoyl-CoA C -acyltransferase fatty acid metabolism                                                                                                                                       | 5                                                                                                                                                                        | Ugp2                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 2.3.1.97 2.4.99.18                                                                                                                                                       | O70310 P07153                                                                                                                                                            | Glycylpeptide N -tetradecanoyltransferase 1 Dolichyl-diphosphooligosaccharide - protein glycosyltransferase subunit 1 precursor                                                              | 5 5                                                                                                                                                                      | Scp2 Nmt1                                                                                                                                                                |
| 2.4.99.18                                                                                                                                                                | P61806                                                                                                                                                                   | Dolichyl-diphosphooligosaccharide                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                          | Rpn1                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 2.5.1.18                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                          | - protein glycosyltransferase subunit DAD1 glycoprotein                                                                                                                                      | 5                                                                                                                                                                        | Dad1                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 2.5.1.6                                                                                                                                                                  | P08011                                                                                                                                                                   | Microsomal glutathione S -transferase 1 detoxi /uniFB01 cation S-Adenosylmethionine synthase isoform type-2                                                                                  | 5 5                                                                                                                                                                      | Mgst1 Mat2a                                                                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          | Serine/threonine-protein kinase VRK1 isoform a non-speci /uniFB01                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                                          | P18298 Q80X41                                                                                                                                                            | c serine/threonine protein kinase                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                          | Vrk1                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 2.7.11.1                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                          | Inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase subunit beta I κ B kinase/I κ B kinase                                                                                                            | 5                                                                                                                                                                        | Ikbkb                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 2.7.11.10                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                              | 5                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Hydrolases                                                                                                                                                               | O88351                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          | Nceh1                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 3.1.1.- 3.1.1.- 3.1.27.-                                                                                                                                                 | B2GV54 O35244 P70709                                                                                                                                                     | Neutral cholesterol ester hydrolase 1 Peroxiredoxin-6 Eosinophil cationic protein precursor                                                                                                  | 4 4 4                                                                                                                                                                    | Prdx6 Ear11                                                                                                                                                              |
| 3.1.3.16 3.1.3.25                                                                                                                                                        | Q9WVR7 P97697                                                                                                                                                            | Protein phosphatase 1F Inositol monophosphatase 1/inositol-phosphate phosphatase                                                                                                             | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Ppm1f                                                                                                                                                                    |
|                                                                                                                                                                          | P97697                                                                                                                                                                   | Inositol monophosphatase 1/D-galactose 1-phosphate phosphatase                                                                                                                               | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Impa1                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 3.1.3.94 3.1.6.12                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          | Arylsulfatase B precursor                                                                                                                                                                    | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Impa1 Arsb                                                                                                                                                               |
|                                                                                                                                                                          | P50430                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 3.2.1.114 3.2.1.52                                                                                                                                                       | P28494 Q6AXR4                                                                                                                                                            | Alpha-mannosidase 2                                                                                                                                                                          | 4 4                                                                                                                                                                      | Man2a1 Hexb                                                                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          | beta-Hexosaminidase subunit beta precursor                                                                                                                                                   | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Lta4h                                                                                                                                                                    |
|                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          | leukotriene A-4 hydrolase                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 3.3.2.6                                                                                                                                                                  | P24527                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          | Lta4h                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 3.3.2.6 3.4.11.14                                                                                                                                                        | P30349                                                                                                                                                                   | Leukotriene A-4 hydrolase                                                                                                                                                                    | 4 4                                                                                                                                                                      | Npepps                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 3.4.11.3                                                                                                                                                                 | Q11011                                                                                                                                                                   | Puromycin-sensitive aminopeptidase                                                                                                                                                           | 4 4                                                                                                                                                                      | Lnpep Ctsg                                                                                                                                                               |
| 3.4.21.20 3.4.21.76                                                                                                                                                      | P97629 P28293                                                                                                                                                            | Leucyl-cystinyl aminopeptidase isoform 1/oxytocinase Cathepsin G preproprotein                                                                                                               | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Prtn3                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 3.5.3.15                                                                                                                                                                 | Q61096 O88807                                                                                                                                                            | Myeloblastin Protein-arginine deiminase type-4                                                                                                                                               | 4 4                                                                                                                                                                      | Padi4                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 3.5.3.18                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                          | N (G), N                                                                                                                                                                                     | 4                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                                          | O08557                                                                                                                                                                   | (G)-Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 1 Ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase 1                                                                                               | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Ddah1                                                                                                                                                                    |
|                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          | Diphosphoinositol polyphosphate phosphohydrolase 2                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                          | Entpd1                                                                                                                                                                   |
|                                                                                                                                                                          | P97687 Q8R2U6                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                              | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Nudt4                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 3.6.1.5                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 3.6.1.52                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                          | Dynamin-2/dynamin GTPase                                                                                                                                                                     | 4                                                                                                                                                                        | Dnm2                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 3.6.5.5 3.2.1.51 3.4.19.12                                                                                                                                               | P39052 P17164 Q9DCH4                                                                                                                                                     | Tissue alpha-L-fucosidase Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit F Caspase-1                                                                                                     | 5 5                                                                                                                                                                      | Fuca1 Eif3f                                                                                                                                                              |
| 3.4.22.36 3.4.23.5                                                                                                                                                       | P43527 P24268 P60901                                                                                                                                                     | Cathepsin D Proteasome subunit alpha type-6 N                                                                                                                                                | 5 5 5                                                                                                                                                                    | Casp1 Ctsd                                                                                                                                                               |
| 3.4.25.1 3.5.1.-                                                                                                                                                         | Q5KTC7                                                                                                                                                                   | -Acylethanolamine-hydrolyzing acid amidase precursor DNA replication licensing factor MCM3                                                                                                   | 5 5                                                                                                                                                                      | Naaa                                                                                                                                                                     |
| 3.6.4.12                                                                                                                                                                 | P25206                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          | Psma6                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Hydrolases                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                          | Mcm3                                                                                                                                                                     |

(

continued

)

Table 1

| EC number   | Protein ID   | Description                                                                  | Cluster   | Gene symbol   |
|-------------|--------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|---------------|
| 3.6.4.12    | P49717       | DNA replication licensing factor MCM4                                        | 5         | Mcm4          |
| 3.6.4.12    | P49718       | DNA replication licensing factor MCM5                                        | 5         | Mcm5          |
| 3.6.4.12    | P97310       | DNA replication licensing factor MCM2                                        | 5         | Mcm2          |
| 3.6.4.12    | P97311       | DNA replication licensing factor MCM6                                        | 5         | Mcm6          |
| 3.6.4.12    | Q61881       | DNA replication licensing factor MCM7                                        | 5         | Mcm7          |
| 3.6.4.12    | Q6PDQ2       | Chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 4                                  | 5         | Chd4          |
| 3.6.4.13    | O35286       | Putative pre-mRNA-splicing factor ATP-dependent RNA helicase DHX15 isoform 2 | 5         | Dhx15         |
| 3.6.4.13    | P60843       | Eukaryotic initiation factor 4 A-I isoform 1                                 | 5         | Eif4a1        |
| 3.6.4.13    | Q61656       | Probable ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX5                                     | 5         | Ddx5          |
| 3.6.4.13    | Q5U216       | ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX39A                                            | 5         | Ddx39a        |
| Lyases      |              |                                                                              |           |               |
| 4.1.2.13    | P05065       | Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase A                                             | 4         | Aldoa         |
| 4.2.99.18   | P62908       | 40S ribosomal protein S3                                                     | 5         | Rps3          |
| Isomerases  |              |                                                                              |           |               |
| 5.3.2.1     | P30904       | Macrophage migration inhibitory factor                                       | 4         | Mif           |
| 5.3.3.12    | P30904       | Macrophage migration inhibitory factor                                       | 4         | Mif           |
| 5.4.2.2     | Q9D0F9       | Phosphoglucomutase-2                                                         | 4         | Pgm2          |
| 5.2.1.8     | P24368       | Peptidyl-prolyl cis -trans isomerase B/Peptidylprolyl isomerase              | 5         | Ppib          |
| 5.2.1.8     | Q62446       | Peptidyl-prolyl cis -trans isomerase FKBP3                                   | 5         | Fkbp3         |
| 5.2.1.8     | Q6DGG0       | Peptidyl-prolyl cis -trans isomerase D                                       | 5         | Ppid          |
| 5.3.4.1     | P04785       | Protein disul /uniFB01 de-isomerase                                          | 5         | P4hb          |
| 5.3.4.1     | P11598       | Protein disul /uniFB01 de-isomerase A3                                       | 5         | Pdia3         |
| 5.3.4.1     | P38659       | Protein disul /uniFB01 de-isomerase A4                                       | 5         | Pdia4         |
| 5.3.4.1     | Q63081       | Protein disul /uniFB01 de-isomerase A6                                       | 5         | Pdia6         |
| Ligases     |              |                                                                              |           |               |
| 6.1.1.10    | Q68FL6       | Methionine - tRNA ligase, cytoplasmic isoform 2                              | 5         | Mars          |
| 6.1.1.12    | P15178       | Aspartate - tRNA ligase, cytoplasmic                                         | 5         | Dars          |
| 6.3.2.-     | F1LP64       | E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase TRIP12                                           | 5         | Trip12        |
| 6.3.2.-     | O09181       | SUMO-conjugating enzyme UBC9                                                 | 5         | Ube2i         |
| 6.3.2.-     | Q9Z1F9       | SUMO-activating enzyme subunit 2                                             | 5         | Uba2          |
| 6.3.2.19    | P61079       | Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 D3                                           | 5         | Ube2d3        |
| 6.3.4.5     | P09034       | Argininosuccinate synthase                                                   | 5         | Ass1          |

dismutase, some non-speci /uniFB01 c serine/threonine protein tyrosine kinases, dynamin GTPase, protein disul /uniFB01 de isomerase, peptidylprolyl isomerase, and argininosuccinate synthase that could be key players modulating changes in PMNs after IPC. It will be very useful to check the functional role of these proteins through further experimental and clinical tests that can help to /uniFB01 nd a way to reduce the injury caused by neutrophils after IR and further elucidate the effect of IPC on neutrophil biology.

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx. doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2016.05.016.

## Con ict of interest /uniFB02

The authors declare to have no con /uniFB02 ict of interest.

## Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge TWAS, CNPq, CAPES, FAPESP, FA P -DF and FUB-UnB for /uniFB01 nancial support.

Fig. 5. Prediction of enzyme activity for the rat neutrophil proteome. A bar chart represents the predicted enzyme activity for signi /uniFB01 cantly regulated proteins from cluster 4 and 5.

<!-- image -->

## References

- chromatography with analysis by HILIC and mass spectrometry, Nat. Protoc. 5 (2010) 1974 -1982.
- [1] S. Yamamoto, M. Tanabe, G. Wakabayashi, M. Shimazu, K. Matsumoto, M. Kitajima, The role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-1beta in ischemia-reperfusion injury of the rat small intestine, J. Surg. Res. 99 (2001) 134 -141.
- [2] E. Guneli, Z. Cavdar, H. Islekel, S. Sarioglu, S. Erbayraktar, M. Kiray, et al., Erythropoietin protects the intestine against ischemia/ reperfusion injury in rats, Mol. Med. (Cambridge, Mass) 13 (2007) 509 -517.
- [3] J. Mojzis, K. Hviscova, D. Germanova, D. Bukovicova, L. Mirossay, Protective effect of quercetin on ischemia/reperfusion-induced gastric mucosal injury in rats, Physiol. Res./Acad. Sci. Bohemoslov. 50 (2001) 501 -506.
- [4] B. Fontes, W. Fontes, E.M. Utiyama, D. Birolini, The ef /uniFB01 cacy of loop colostomy for complete fecal diversion, Dis. Colon Rectum 31 (1988) 298 -302.
- [5] I.H. Mallick, W. Yang, M.C. Winslet, A.M. Seifalian, Ischemia-reperfusion injury of the intestine and protective strategies against injury, Dig. Dis. Sci. 49 (2004) 1359 -1377.
- [6] C. Hierholzer, J.C. Kalff, G. Audolfsson, T.R. Billiar, D.J. Tweardy, A.J. Bauer, Molecular and functional contractile sequelae of rat intestinal ischemia/reperfusion injury, Transplantation 68 (1999) 1244 -1254.
- [7] E.M. Mbachu, L.V. Klein, B.B. Rubin, T.F. Lindsay, A monoclonal antibody against cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant attenuates injury in the small intestine in a model of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, J. Vasc. Surg. 39 (2004) 1104 1111. -
- [8] S. Massberg, A.P. Gonzalez, R. Leiderer, M.D. Menger, K. Messmer, In vivo assessment of the in /uniFB02 uence of cold preservation time on microvascular reperfusion injury after experimental small bowel transplantation, Br. J. Surg. 85 (1998) 127 -133.
- [9] A.C. Sisley, T. Desai, J.M. Harig, B.L. Gewertz, Neutrophil depletion attenuates human intestinal reperfusion injury, J. Surg. Res. 57 (1994) 192 -196.
- [10] D.G. Souza, D.C. Cara, G.D. Cassali, S.F. Coutinho, M.R. Silveira, S.P. Andrade, et al., Effects of the PAF receptor antagonist UK74505 on local and remote reperfusion injuries following ischaemia of the superior mesenteric artery in the rat, Br. J. Pharmacol. 131 (2000) 1800 -1808.
- [11] J.T. Willerson, Pharmacologic approaches to reperfusion injury, Adv. Pharmacol. (San Diego, Calif) 39 (1997) 291 -312.
- [12] C.F. Morris, M. Tahir, S. Arshid, M.S. Castro, W. Fontes, Reconciling the IPC and twohit models: dissecting the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms of two seemingly opposing frameworks, J. Immunol. Res. 2015 (2015) 697193.
- [13] C.E. Murry, R.B. Jennings, K.A. Reimer, Preconditioning with ischemia: a delay of lethal cell injury in ischemic myocardium, Circulation 74 (1986) 1124 -1136.
- [14] G. Hotter, D. Closa, M. Prados, L. Fernandez-Cruz, N. Prats, E. Gelpi, et al., Intestinal preconditioning is mediated by a transient increase in nitric oxide, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 222 (1996) 27 -32.
- [15] R.K. Kharbanda, M. Peters, B. Walton, M. Kattenhorn, M. Mullen, N. Klein, et al., Ischemic preconditioning prevents endothelial injury and systemic neutrophil activation during ischemia-reperfusion in humans in vivo, Circulation 103 (2001) 1624 1630. -
- [16] J.M. Davis, D.C. Gute, S. Jones, A. Krsmanovic, R.J. Korthuis, Ischemic preconditioning prevents postischemic P-selectin expression in the rat small intestine, Am. J. Phys. 277 (1999) H2476 -H2481.
- [17] P. Beauchamp, V. Richard, F. Tamion, F. Lallemand, J.P. Lebreton, H. Vaudry, et al., Protective effects of preconditioning in cultured rat endothelial cells: effects on neutrophil adhesion and expression of ICAM-1 after anoxia and reoxygenation, Circulation 100 (1999) 541 -546.
- [18] S. Aksoyek, I. Cinel, D. Avlan, L. Cinel, C. Ozturk, P. Gurbuz, et al., Intestinal ischemic preconditioning protects the intestine and reduces bacterial translocation, Shock (Augusta, Ga) 18 (2002) 476 -480.
- [19] B. Wu, A. Ootani, R. Iwakiri, T. Fujise, S. Tsunada, S. Toda, et al., Ischemic preconditioning attenuates ischemia-reperfusion-induced mucosal apoptosis by inhibiting the mitochondria-dependent pathway in rat small intestine, Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 286 (2004) G580 -G587.
- [20] K.X. Liu, Y.S. Li, Z.X. Wang, C. Li, J.X. Liu, W.Q. Huang, [Proteomics study of intestinal mucosa after ischemic preconditioning against intestinal ischemic reperfusion injury in rats], Zhonghua wei chang wai ke za zhi = Chinese journal of gastrointestinal surgery 12 (2009) 598 -602.
- [21] K.X. Liu, C. Li, Y.S. Li, B.L. Yuan, M. Xu, Z. Xia, et al., Proteomic analysis of intestinal ischemia/reperfusion injury and ischemic preconditioning in rats reveals the protective role of aldose reductase, Proteomics 10 (2010) 4463 -4475.
- [22] R. Bolli, The late phase of preconditioning, Circ. Res. 87 (2000) 972 -983.
- [23] P. Cohen, The regulation of protein function by multisite phosphorylation -a 25 year update, Trends Biochem. Sci. 25 (2000) 596 -601.
- [24] M. Tahir, S. Arshid, A.M. Heimbecker, M.S. Castro, E.F. de Souza Montero, B. Fontes, et al., Evaluation of the effects of ischemic preconditioning on the hematological parameters of rats subjected to intestinal ischemia and reperfusion, Clinics 70 (2015) 61 68. -
- [25] E.M.S. Russo-Carbolante, A.E.C.S. Azzolini, A.C.M. Polizello, Y.M. Lucisano-Valim, Comparative study of four isolation procedures to obtain rat neutrophils, Comp. Clin. Pathol. 11 (2002) 71 -76.
- [26] J.R. Wisniewski, A. Zougman, N. Nagaraj, M. Mann, Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis, Nat. Methods 6 (2009) 359 -362.
- [27] J. Gobom, E. Nordhoff, E. Mirgorodskaya, R. Ekman, P. Roepstorff, Sample puri /uniFB01 cation and preparation technique based on nano-scale reversed-phase columns for the sensitive analysis of complex peptide mixtures by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry, J. Mass Spectrom.: JMS. 34 (1999) 105 -116.
- [28] I. Laursen, P. Hojrup, G. Houen, M. Christiansen, Characterisation of the 1st SSI puri/uniFB01 ed MBL standard, Clin. Chim. Acta Int. J. Clin. Chem. 395 (2008) 159 -161.
- [29] G. Palmisano, S.E. Lendal, K. Engholm-Keller, R. Leth-Larsen, B.L. Parker, M.R. Larsen, Selective enrichment of sialic acid-containing glycopeptides using titanium dioxide
- [30] W. Fontes, R.B. Cunha, M.V. Sousa, L. Morhy, Improving the recovery of lysine in automated protein sequencing, Anal. Biochem. 258 (1998) 259 -267.
- [31] M. Brosch, L. Yu, T. Hubbard, J. Choudhary, Accurate and sensitive peptide identi /uniFB01 cation with Mascot Percolator, J. Proteome Res. 8 (2009) 3176 -3181.
- [32] X.L.L. Xie, G. Beni, A validity measure for fuzzy clustering, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. 13 (1991) 841 -847.
- [33] V. Schwammle, O.N. Jensen, A simple and fast method to determine the parameters for fuzzy c-means cluster analysis, Bioinformatics 26 (2010) 2841 -2848.
- [34] M.E. Futschik, B. Carlisle, Noise-robust soft clustering of gene expression timecourse data, J. Bioinforma. Comput. Biol. 3 (2005) 965 -988.
- [35] J.C. Bezdek, Cluster validity with fuzzy sets, J. Cybern. 3 (1973) 58 -73.
- [36] A. Nascimento, A. Chapeaurouge, J. Perales, A. Sebben, M.V. Sousa, W. Fontes, et al., Puri /uniFB01 cation, characterization and homology analysis of ocellatin 4, a cytolytic peptide from the skin secretion of the frog Leptodactylus ocellatus , Toxicon: Off. J. Int. Soc. Toxin. 50 (2007) 1095 -1104.
- [37] T. Taverner, Y.V. Karpievitch, A.D. Polpitiya, J.N. Brown, A.R. Dabney, G.A. Anderson, et al., DanteR: an extensible R-based tool for quantitative analysis of -omics data, Bioinformatics 28 (2012) 2404 -2406.
- [38] G.K. Smyth, Limma: Linear Models for Microarray Data. Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Solutions Using R and Bioconductor, Springer, New York, 2005.
- [39] R. Breitling, P. Armengaud, A. Amtmann, P. Herzyk, Rank products: a simple, yet powerful, new method to detect differentially regulated genes in replicated microarray experiments, FEBS Lett. 573 (2004) 83 -92.
- [40] V. Schwammle, I.R. Leon, O.N. Jensen, Assessment and improvement of statistical tools for comparative proteomics analysis of sparse data sets with few experimental replicates, J. Proteome Res. 12 (2013) 3874 -3883.
- [41] J.D. Storey, A direct approach to false discovery rates, J. R. Stat. Soc. B 64 (2002) 479 498. -
- [42] J. Wang, D. Duncan, Z. Shi, B. Zhang, WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis toolkit (WebGestalt): update 2013, Nucleic Acids Res. 41 (2013) W77 -W83.
- [43] D. Szklarczyk, A. Franceschini, S. Wyder, K. Forslund, D. Heller, J. Huerta-Cepas, et al., STRING v10: protein-protein interaction networks, integrated over the tree of life, Nucleic Acids Res. 43 (2015) D447 -D452.
- [44] X. Xuanli Lisa, G. Beni, A validity measure for fuzzy clustering, Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. IEEE Trans. 13 (1991) 841 -847.
- [45] S. Ogawa, H. Gerlach, C. Esposito, A. Pasagian-Macaulay, J. Brett, D. Stern, Hypoxia modulates the barrier and coagulant function of cultured bovine endothelium. Increased monolayer permeability and induction of procoagulant properties, J. Clin. Invest. 85 (1990) 1090 -1098.
- [46] S. Ogawa, S. Koga, K. Kuwabara, J. Brett, B. Morrow, S.A. Morris, et al., Hypoxia-induced increased permeability of endothelial monolayers occurs through lowering of cellular cAMP levels, Am. J. Physiol. 262 (1992) C546 -C554.
- [47] N. Borregaard, T. Herlin, Energy metabolism of human neutrophils during phagocytosis, J. Clin. Invest. 70 (1982) 550 -557.
- [48] K.K. Peachman, D.S. Lyles, D.A. Bass, Mitochondria in eosinophils: functional role in apoptosis but not respiration, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98 (2001) 1717 -1722.
- [49] Y. Bao, C. Ledderose, A.F. Graf, B. Brix, T. Birsak, A. Lee, et al., mTOR and differential activation of mitochondria orchestrate neutrophil chemotaxis, J. Cell Biol. 210 (2015) 1153 -1164.
- [50] J. el Benna, J.M. Ruedi, B.M. Babior, Cytosolic guanine nucleotide-binding protein Rac2 operates in vivo as a component of the neutrophil respiratory burst oxidase. Transfer of Rac2 and the cytosolic oxidase components p47phox and p67phox to the submembranous actin cytoskeleton during oxidase activation, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 6729 -6734.
- [51] W.M. Nauseef, B.D. Volpp, S. McCormick, K.G. Leidal, R.A. Clark, Assembly of the neutrophil respiratory burst oxidase. Protein kinase C promotes cytoskeletal and membrane association of cytosolic oxidase components, J. Biol. Chem. 266 (1991) 5911 5917. -
- [52] L.O. Carvalho, E.N. Aquino, A.C. Neves, W. Fontes, The neutrophil nucleus and its role in neutrophilic function, J. Cell. Biochem. 116 (2015) 1831 -1836.
- [53] M.V. Cohen, C.P. Baines, J.M. Downey, Ischemic preconditioning: from adenosine receptor to KATP channel, Annu. Rev. Physiol. 62 (2000) 79 -109.
- [54] G. Xia, A.E. Martin, G.E. Besner, Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor downregulates expression of adhesion molecules and in /uniFB01 ltration of in /uniFB02 ammatory cells after intestinal ischemia/reperfusion injury, J. Pediatr. Surg. 38 (2003) 434 439. -
- [55] C.J. Prestigiacomo, S.C. Kim, E.S. Connolly Jr., H. Liao, S.F. Yan, D.J. Pinsky, CD18-mediated neutrophil recruitment contributes to the pathogenesis of reperfused but not nonreperfused stroke, Stroke 30 (1999) 1110 -1117.
- [56] Z.G. Zhang, M. Chopp, W.X. Tang, N. Jiang, R.L. Zhang, Postischemic treatment (24 h) with anti-CD11b and anti-CD18 monoclonal antibodies are neuroprotective after transient (2 h) focal cerebral ischemia in the rat, Brain Res. 698 (1995) 79 -85.
- [57] M. Krams, K.R. Lees, W. Hacke, A.P. Grieve, J.M. Orgogozo, G.A. Ford, Acute stroke therapy by inhibition of neutrophils (ASTIN): an adaptive dose-response study of UK-279,276 in acute ischemic stroke, Stroke 34 (2003) 2543 -2548.
- [58] N.F. Neel, J. Sai, A.J. Ham, T. Sobolik-Delmaire, R.L. Mernaugh, A. Richmond, IQGAP1 is a novel CXCR2-interacting protein and essential component of the ' chemosynapse , ' PLoS One 6 (2011), e23813.
- [59] A. Itakura, J.E. Aslan, B.T. Kusanto, K.G. Phillips, J.E. Porter, P.K. Newton, et al., p21-Activated kinase (PAK) regulates cytoskeletal reorganization and directional migration in human neutrophils, PLoS One 8 (2013), e73063.
- [60] J. Jacobelli, R.S. Friedman, M.A. Conti, A.M. Lennon-Dumenil, M. Piel, C.M. Sorensen, et al., Con /uniFB01 nement-optimized three-dimensional T cell amoeboid motility is modulated via myosin IIA-regulated adhesions, Nat. Immunol. 11 (2010) 953 -961.

- [61] C. Yu, L. Xu, L.F. Chen, Y.J. Guan, M. Kim, W.L. Bif /uniFB02 , et al., PRBC-derived plasma induces non-muscle myosin type IIA-mediated neutrophil migration and morphologic change, Immunopharmacol. Immunotoxicol. 35 (2013) 71 -79.
- [62] D.R. Ambruso, C. Knall, A.N. Abell, J. Panepinto, A. Kurkchubasche, G. Thurman, et al., Human neutrophil immunode /uniFB01 ciency syndrome is associated with an inhibitory Rac2 mutation, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97 (2000) 4654 -4659.
- [63] Y.Y. Ji, Z.D. Wang, S.F. Wang, B.T. Wang, Z.A. Yang, X.R. Zhou, et al., Ischemic preconditioning ameliorates intestinal injury induced by ischemia-reperfusion in rats, World J. Gastroenterol.: WJG. 21 (2015) 8081 -8088.
- [64] C.D. Buckley, E.A. Ross, H.M. McGettrick, C.E. Osborne, O. Haworth, C. Schmutz, et al., Identi /uniFB01 cation of a phenotypically and functionally distinct population of long-lived neutrophils in a model of reverse endothelial migration, J. Leukoc. Biol. 79 (2006) 303 311. -
- [65] P.A. Kramer, S. Ravi, B. Chacko, M.S. Johnson, V.M. Darley-Usmar, A review of the mitochondrial and glycolytic metabolism in human platelets and leukocytes: implications for their use as bioenergetic biomarkers, Redox Biol. 2 (2014) 206 -210.
- [66] E.A. Federzoni, P.J. Valk, B.E. Torbett, T. Haferlach, B. Lowenberg, M.F. Fey, et al., PU.1 is linking the glycolytic enzyme HK3 in neutrophil differentiation and survival of APL cells, Blood 119 (2012) 4963 -4970.
- [67] D.R. Ambruso, M.A. Ellison, G.W. Thurman, T.L. Leto, Peroxiredoxin 6 translocates to the plasma membrane during neutrophil activation and is required for optimal NADPH oxidase activity, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2012 (1823) 306 -315.
- [68] V. Campos, R.C.N. Melo, L.P. Silva, E.N. Aquino, M.S. Castro, W. Fontes, Characterization of neutrophil adhesion to different titanium surfaces, B Mater. Sci. 37 (2014) 157 166. -
- [69] H. Nishiura, R. Zhao, J. Chen, K. Taniguchi, T. Yamamoto, Involvement of regional neutrophil apoptosis promotion by ribosomal protein S19 oligomers in resolution of experimental acute in /uniFB02 ammation, Pathol. Int. 63 (2013) 581 -590.
- [70] J.-Y. Zhou, R.K. Krovvidi, Y. Gao, H. Gao, B.O. Petritis, A. De, et al., Trauma-associated human neutrophil alterations revealed by comparative proteomics pro /uniFB01 ling, Proteomics Clin. Appl. 7 (2013), http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/prca.201200109.
- [71] L.M. Teles, E.N. Aquino, A.C. Neves, C.H. Garcia, P. Roepstorff, B. Fontes, et al., Comparison of the neutrophil proteome in trauma patients and normal controls, Protein Pept. Lett. 19 (2012) 663 -672.
- [72] K.A. Kaminski, T.A. Bonda, J. Korecki, W.J. Musial, Oxidative stress and neutrophil activation -the two keystones of ischemia/reperfusion injury, Int. J. Cardiol. 86 (2002) 41 59. -

- [73] A. Franceschini, D. Szklarczyk, S. Frankild, M. Kuhn, M. Simonovic, A. Roth, et al., STRING v9.1: protein-protein interaction networks, with increased coverage and integration, Nucleic Acids Res. 41 (2013) D808 -D815.
- [74] L.A. Quilliam, R. Khosravi-Far, S.Y. Huff, C.J. Der, Guanine nucleotide exchange factors: activators of the Ras superfamily of proteins, BioEssays: News Rev. Mol. Cell. Dev. Biol. 17 (1995) 395 -404.
- [75] I. Fridovich, Superoxide radical and superoxide dismutases, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64 (1995) 97 -112.
- [76] R. Brigelius-Flohe, M. Maiorino, Glutathione peroxidases, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2013 (1830) 3289 -3303.
- [77] E.M. Hanschmann, J.R. Godoy, C. Berndt, C. Hudemann, C.H. Lillig, Thioredoxins, glutaredoxins, and peroxiredoxins -molecular mechanisms and health signi /uniFB01 cance: from cofactors to antioxidants to redox signaling, Antioxid. Redox Signal. 19 (2013) 1539 1605. -
- [78] G. Kim, N.B. Cole, J.C. Lim, H. Zhao, R.L. Levine, Dual sites of protein initiation control the localization and myristoylation of methionine sulfoxide reductase A, J. Biol. Chem. 285 (2010) 18085 -18094.
- [79] B.J. Zimmerman, D.N. Granger, Mechanisms of reperfusion injury, Am. J. Med. Sci. 307 (1994) 284 -292.
- [80] G. Montrucchio, G. Alloatti, G. Camussi, Role of platelet-activating factor in cardiovascular pathophysiology, Physiol. Rev. 80 (2000) 1669 -1699.
- [81] E.N. Aquino, A.C. Neves, K.C. Santos, U. CE, P.E. De Souza, J.R. Correa, et al., Proteomic Analysis of Neutrophil Priming by PAF. Protein and Peptide Letters, 2015.
- [82] S.M. Ferguson, P. De Camilli, Dynamin, a membrane-remodelling GTPase, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 13 (2012) 75 -88.
- [83] S.I. Galkina, N.V. Fedorova, M.V. Serebryakova, E.A. Arifulin, V.I. Stadnichuk, T.V. Gaponova, et al., Inhibition of the GTPase dynamin or actin depolymerisation initiates outward plasma membrane tubulation/vesiculation (cytoneme formation) in neutrophils, Biol. Cell 107 (2015) 144 -158.
- [84] H. Masai, S. Matsumoto, Z. You, N. Yoshizawa-Sugata, M. Oda, Eukaryotic chromosome DNA replication: where, when, and how? Annu. Rev. Biochem. 79 (2010) 89 -130.
- [85] M.A. Rostam, T.J. Piva, H.B. Rezaei, D. Kamato, P.J. Little, W. Zheng, et al., Peptidylprolyl isomerases: functionality and potential therapeutic targets in cardiovascular disease, Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 42 (2015) 117 -124.
- [86] Y. Lu, T.M. Leung, S.C. Ward, N. Nieto, Partial deletion of argininosuccinate synthase protects from pyrazole plus lipopolysaccharide-induced liver injury by decreasing nitrosative stress, Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 302 (2012) G287 -G295.