<!-- image -->

## Review Article

## Neutrophils in acute inflammation: current concepts and translational implications

Andreas Margraf, 1,2 Clifford A. Lowell, 3 and Alexander Zarbock 1

1 Department of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care and Pain Medicine, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany; 2 William Harvey Research Institute, Bart s and the London School of Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; and ' 3 Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco

Modulation of neutrophil recruitment and function is crucial for targeting in /uniFB02 ammatory cells to sites of infection to combat invading pathogens while, at the same time, limiting host tissue injury or autoimmunity. The underlying mechanisms regulating recruitment of neutrophils, 1 of the most abundant in /uniFB02 ammatory cells, have gained increasing interest over the years. The previously described classical recruitment cascade of leukocytes has been extended to include capturing, rolling, adhesion, crawling, and transmigration, as well as a reversetransmigration step that is crucial for balancing immune defense and control of remote organ endothelial leakage. Current developments in the /uniFB01 eld emphasize the importance of cellular interplay, tissue environmental

cues, circadian rhythmicity, detection of neutrophil phenotypes, differential chemokine sensing, and contribution of distinct signaling components to receptor activation and integrin conformations. The use of therapeutics modulating neutrophil activation responses, as well as mutations causing dysfunctional neutrophil receptors and impaired signaling cascades, have been de /uniFB01 ned in translational animal models. Human correlates of such mutations result in increased susceptibility to infections or organ damage. This review focuses on current advances in the understanding of the regulation of neutrophil recruitment and functionality and translational implications of current discoveries in the /uniFB01 eld with a focus on acute in /uniFB02 ammation and sepsis.

## Introduction

A functioning immune system is crucial to combat invading pathogens. Nonetheless, uncontrolled activation and in /uniFB01 ltration of immune cells can lead to organ damage, placing the host in danger. Clinical manifestations of or disease associated with such uncontrolled immune reactions include glomerulonephritis, vaso-occlusion -related pain crises in sickle cell disease, ischemia reperfusion damage, acute kidney injury, hepatic steatosis, and septic shock. Sepsis is associated with a high mortality and involves uncontrolled immune cell in /uniFB01 ltration and activation, edema formation, tissue damage, and organ dysfunction. 1,2 Consequently, understanding the individual regulatory steps, as well as speci /uniFB01 c recruitment and activation cues of immune cells in varying tissues and in /uniFB02 ammatory settings, is a prerequisite to developing potential therapeutic approaches.

Leukocytes consist of different cell populations, including granulocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils), monocytes, and T and B lymphocytes, each ful /uniFB01 lling distinct immunologic functions. Neutrophils, the most abundant leukocyte, reach the in /uniFB02 ammatory site in a cascade-like manner, leading to activation of speci /uniFB01 c effector functions, such as release of reactive oxygen species, degranulation, formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), and phagocytosis. 3-6 Imbalance in the number, recruitment, or functionality of neutrophils during this process

results in clinical maladies presenting with uncontrolled infections, immunopathology, or autoimmunity.

## Traditional steps of the leukocyte recruitment cascade: a basic understanding

Effector-based functionality requires precise targeting of neutrophils to the site of infection. This process relies on differentially regulated steps, discovered by various pioneers in the /uniFB01 eld, 7-14 which can be described in a simpli /uniFB01 ed cascade-like manner, resulting in successful organ in /uniFB01 ltration.

Capturing and rolling Neutrophils are free/uniFB02 owing cells within the blood stream. Localized targeting toward the vessel wall and transient interactions manifest via rheologicand deformabilitydependent margination, followed by capturing. 15,16 Capturing (or tethering) itself can be separated into 2 independent, but closely related, steps: the primary capture, implying direct neutrophilendothelial interaction, and secondary L-selectin mediated capturing, -in which neutrophils interact with already rolling leukocytes or leukocytic fragments. 17 Subsequently, the neutrophil engages in a constant slower interaction termed ' rolling ' (Figure 1). Although fast rolling is crucially reliant on endothelial and/or platelet P-selectin, slow rolling relies on endothelial-expressed E-selectin. 18-21 Rolling involves sialyl-Lewis X and the neutrophil-expressed glycosylationdependent 22,23 receptor P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 (PSGL-1), which, following binding to E- or P-selectin, can induce an integrin

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. Updated leukocyte recruitment cascade and translational implications. Free/uniFB02 owing neutrophils are captured by transient PSGL-1 selectin -and VLA4 VCAM/VLA-6 laminin interactions. Rolling (fast: P-selectin; --slow: E-selectin) is impacted by PSGL-1 and ESL-1 binding to their selectin partners, as well as CD44, which, in a lipid raft and Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK)-dependent manner, affects E-selectin -mediated slow rolling. Chemokine-mediated full activation of LFA-1 leads to ICAM-1 dependent -/uniFB01 rm neutrophil adhesion. This adhesive bond is further strengthened by Mac-1 interactions. Signaling elements and recruitment cues involved in integrin activation include talin-1 and kindlin-3. The subsequent slower crawling toward endothelial access points is primarily controlled by CXCL-1, whereas the transmigration toward the abluminal side is CXCL 2 dependent, followed by another step of abluminal CXCL-1 -dependent crawling. Neutrophil transmigration depends on pore size selection and is additionally facilitated by mast cell -derived tumor necrosis factor (TNF). Neutrophils exert their functions within the tissue but are capable of reentering the blood circulation (reverse transmigration) in a Mac-1, neutrophil elastase, LTB-4, JAM-C -dependent pathway, taking on an activated phenotype. Different translational studies and observations have been performed to highlight implications of distinct mechanistic cues in neutrophil recruitment and functionality (upper letters). mAb, monoclonal antibody; MMPs, matrix metalloproteinase; NE, neutrophil elastase; PEU, perivascular extravasation unit; 3D, three dimensional.

<!-- image -->

## Steps of the recruitment cascade:

## Translational considerations:

- 1. Free flow
- 2. Margination and capturing
- 3. Tethering/sling formation: high shear; adhesive bonds due to PSGL-1/LFA-1 rich regions
- 4. Rolling: Selectins (fast: P , slow: E); PSGL-1; Sialyl Lewis x ; Actin polymerization; Myo1F
- 5. Adhesion: Chemokine signaling; integrin activation (-&gt; LFA-1, VLA4, VLA6); integrin regulators: Kindlin, Talin, Rap, RIAM, ILK, PKC and: Adhesion strengthening: Chemokine signaling; integrins (Mac1); signaling components: ArhGap15, WASp, ERM proteins, SRC kinase family
- 6. Intravascular crawling: 2D; CXCL1; Mac-1, LFA-1
- 7. Transmigration: Pore size selection, CXCL2; ACKR1; mast cell derived TNF
- 8. Subendothelial migration: CXCL-1
- 9. Reverse migration: LTB4, Mac1, JAM-C, HIF1 alpha, CIRP , serine proteases
- 10. Basement membrane penetration: MST-1, Src-family kinases and: Tissue migration: 3D; MMPs
- 11. Effector functions: L-selectin shedding; STIM-1, Skap2.
- 12. Reverse transmigrated neutrophils: activated phenotype.

- a. LAD type II
- b. Blocking of E-/L-/P-selectin
- c.  Absence of actin-polymerization: intermittent rolling
- d. Tether/sling rupture under septic conditions: S100 A8/A9 release
- e. LAD type III
- f. Integrin blocking; BTK-block for fMLP-induced neutrophil arrest
- g. Integrin hyperactivation (cells too sticky to relocate)
- h. STK4 (=MST-1) deficiency: Vesicle trafficking insufficient for successful extravasation
- i. Reverse transmigration: Endothelial leakage at remote organs
- j. mAb preventing NET-degradation

Figure 2. Regulators of neutrophil traf /uniFB01 cking. (A) Integrin activation is distinctly regulated. Selectin engagement results in the intermediate conformation of the integrin, which requires talin-1 binding to the integrin cytoplasmic tail. The high-af /uniFB01 nity conformation requires the presence of talin-1 and kindlin-3. Talin-1 binding relies on formation of a complex with Rap1 and RIAM, whereas kindlin-3 is recruited to the integrin prior to induction of the high-af /uniFB01 nity conformation and transmits its activation signal toward LFA-1 in an ILK, PKC, and pH-domain -dependent manner. Mechanistic differences between LFA-1 and Mac-1 exist in that Mac-1 activation depends on ArhGAP15 and Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK). LRP1 can bind via the I domain to Mac-1 and to a lesser extent to LFA-1. (B) Reverse-transmigrated neutrophils can recirculate and impact leakage even at remote organs, such as the lung. The lung-resident marginated pool of neutrophils undergoes fast Abl kinase -dependent phenotypic changes upon LPS challenge to prime the cells for bacterial ' hunting. ' 85 Overall, neutrophils exert effects within different tissues but are equally impacted and modulated by their surroundings. (C) Circadian rhythms dictate leukocyte release, function and clearance, impacting and modulating many subsequent activation and recruitment mechanisms. (D) Neutrophils interact with endothelial cells, which mediates recruitment and activation. Interaction with platelets helps in activation, priming, and recruitment to in /uniFB02 amed or injured tissue but also occurs during thrombus formation. Interaction of neutrophils with regulatory T cells (Treg) evokes interleukin-10 (IL-10) release by neutrophils. Neutrophil-erythrocyte interaction is prominent in sickle cell disease. Additionally, erythrocytes contain a variety of cytokines that can impact neutrophil functionality.

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. Translational considerations. (A) An adequate assessment of neutrophils present, the degree and necessity of in /uniFB02 ammatory reactions, and evaluation of possible therapeutics must be performed. (B) Leukocyte dysfunction is observable in genetic diseases. Leukocyte adhesion de /uniFB01 ciencies result in an increased risk for infections due to different underlying causes. Also, other causes affecting neutrophils are known, including transfusion, extracorporeal circulation, and in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases. Patients require isolation and immunoprotective measures or adequate control of neutrophil hyperactivation and organ-protection strategies. (C) COVID19 based considerations must take neutrophil phenotypes into account. Anti-in -/uniFB02 ammatory strategies are being discussed, but more precise interventions are needed. Distinguishing between the acute and long phases of COVID are important. Targeted approaches seem to be promising for future endeavors in the therapy of COVID, sepsis, or acute respiratory distress syndrome. (D) Consideration of circadian rhythmicity is crucial for future therapeutic endeavors. Rescheduling of surgeries or interventions is needed, and chronotherapy, light therapy, and sleep interventions are in place. CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; IgE, immunoglobulin E; WAS, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.

<!-- image -->

conformational change from low to intermediate or even high af /uniFB01 nity. 24,25 PSGL-1 is linked to the actin cytoskeleton, which facilitates actin polymerization changes needed for slow rolling. Indeed, defects in the polymerization of the actin cytoskeleton have been described that result in inadequate, ' intermittent rolling. ' 26,27 When observing rolling leukocytes at very high shear rates, small membrane formations, termed ' tethers ' (at the rear) and ' slings ' (at the front), that increase the membrane adhesive area could be observed. Membrane slings feature patches of high PSGL-1 expression, together with leukocyte function antigen 1 (LFA-1) that serves as an adhesive substrate, allowing rolling even at high shear rates. 28 Notably, although tethers appear to engage in more stable interactions, at very high shear rates, such as during septic conditions, they rupture from

neutrophils, forming so-called S100A8/A9-rich ' elongated neutrophil-derived structures. ' 29 These structures release S100A8/A9 into the environment, depending on calcium levels, which may actively promote the in /uniFB02 ammatory milieu at the endothelial surface.

Integrin activation and adhesion Rolling and deceleration of the cell lead to successful interaction of chemokine receptors, such as CXCR-2 and formyl peptide receptors, with their ligands presented on the endothelium. 30 This evokes a multistep signaling response that results in the conformational change of integrins and allowing for shear-resisting cellular adhesion. 14,31 Integrins are heterodimers consisting of an a subunit and a b subunit. The most prominent class of neutrophil-expressed

Figure 4. Common clinical /uniFB01 ndings. Common /uniFB01 ndings can include changes in neutrophil numbers (neutrophilia vs neutropenia), deranged circadian rhythms, or patients with various medications scheduled for surgery or other medical interventions. Causality is to be assessed, and advanced diagnostics or interventions should be planned in a timely manner prior to/in parallel with subsequent treatments. BTK, Bruton tyrosine kinase; ROS, reactive oxygen species; !, current situation; ?, possible cause/s; . , consequences.

<!-- image -->

integrins is the b 2-integrins, of which they express 4 (LFA-1, Mac-1, CR4, and a b D 2) to varying degrees. 32-34 To our knowledge, integrins can exist in 4 conformations, ranging from inactive (bent-closed) to fully active (open). All of the G-protein -coupled receptor (inside-out signaling) -mediated integrin activation cascades commonly result in the recruitment of integrin regulators, including talin-1 and kindlin-3, to the cytoplasmic b tail of the LFA-1 integrin, with differential involvement of other integrin modulators, such as Rap1, RIAM, ILK, and PKC (Figure 2A). 35-38 This successful chemokinemediated full activation results in the high-af /uniFB01 nity conformation of the integrin. The high-af /uniFB01 nity conformation of LFA-1 interacts with its endothelial ligand ICAM-1, which stops slow rolling and arrests the neutrophil on the endothelial surface. 39 In addition to the b 2-integrin LFA-1, the b 1-integrins very late antigen 6 (VLA-6; binding to laminins) and VLA-4 (binding to VCAM-1) have been implicated in neutrophil adhesion. 40-42 This adhesion is strengthened by interaction of the neutrophilic integrin Mac-1 with ICAM-1, a step that is impacted by signaling components Wiskott-Aldrich-syndrome protein (WASp) and ArhGAP15. 43,44

Crawling, transmigration, and abluminal crawling Neutrophil adhesion is followed by slower movement along the endothelium termed ' crawling, ' which can be in the direction of or against the blood /uniFB02 ow. Crawling relies on delicate activationdeactivation steps of integrins, integrin-activation pathway modulators, 43 and actin /uniFB02 ow dynamics. 45 Mac-1 is the major regulator of intravascular crawling on ICAM-1 in the microvasculature. 46 However, neutrophil crawling on primary mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells is regulated by LFA-1 and Mac-1 recognizing the ligands ICAM-1 and ICAM-2, hinting toward organ-speci /uniFB01 c differences in recruitment patterns. 6,47 Following the active search of neutrophils for extravasation sites, diapedesis can occur in a transjunctional (paracellular) or a transcellular fashion. Paracellular diapedesis is the favored route for exit of leukocytes from the vasculature. During this process, neutrophils exert mechanical forces on vascular endothelial cells, resulting in opening of junctional gaps, followed by invasive thrusting of the neutrophil into the abluminal space. 48 This process is enhanced by in ammatory signals, facilitating /uniFB02 endothelial cell contractility, which allows leukocytes to pass. 48 Interestingly, mast cell -derived tissue factor as an in /uniFB02 ammatory

| Study type Reference (year of publication)   | Single-center probatory trial 157 (2020)                                                | Multicenter phase 2a trial 158 (2020)                                                                                                                          | Phase 2a trial 159 (2016)                                     | Phase 2b trial 160 (2020)                                                 | Multicenter phase 2 trial 161 (2019)                                                                                                             | 162, 163                                                                                      | Phase 2 164 (2012)                                                         | 130 (2001)                                                                                                         | 131 (2001)                                                                                                                                     |
|----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Success/failure                              | Positive (improvement of oxygenation); international con rmatory study ongoing /uniFB01 | Mixed (did not meet primary end points; but subgroup analysis might hold potential; downward trend in symptoms; furthermore, modulation of B-cell populations) | Positive (greater ef /uniFB01 cacy and early onset of effect) | Positive (regulation of biomarkers and correlation with disease activity) | Mixed positive (fewer enhancing lesions during weeks 12 to 24 compared with placebo but no difference in relapse rate or disability progression) | Mixed: /uniFB01 rst failure (progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy) and then reallowance | Positive for phase 2 trial (imaging end points improved); awaiting phase 3 | Negative (worse Modi /uniFB01 ed Rankin Scale score in treated patients; more adverse events including infections) | Negative for primary end point: steroid-free remission (but treatment led to increased rate of glucocorticoid dose 0 mg prednisone equivalent) |
| Cell target                                  | B cells, platelets, monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells                | B cells, platelets, monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells                                                                                       | Ubiquitous                                                    | Ubiquitous                                                                | B cells, platelets, monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells                                                                         | HSPCs, T cells, B cells, monocytes, NK cells, eosinophils, neutrophils                        | HSPCs, T cells, B cells, monocytes, NK cells, eosinophils, neutrophils     | Endothelial cells, epithelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, certain leukocyte subsets                       | Endothelial cells, epithelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, certain leukocyte subsets                                                   |
| Molecular/ cellular target                   | BTK inhibition                                                                          | BTK inhibition                                                                                                                                                 | JAK inhibition                                                | JAK1 inhibition                                                           | BTK inhibition                                                                                                                                   | VLA-4                                                                                         | VLA-4                                                                      | ICAM-1 antibody (murine into human)                                                                                | Adhesion/outside- in signaling                                                                                                                 |
| Substance/ intervention                      | Acalabrutinib                                                                           | Spebrutinib (CC-292)                                                                                                                                           | Tofacitinib                                                   | Filgotinib                                                                | Evobrutinib                                                                                                                                      | Natalizumab                                                                                   | Firategrast                                                                | Enlimomab                                                                                                          | ICAM-1 antisense oligonucleotide (ISIS-2302)                                                                                                   |
| Disease                                      | Severe COVID-19                                                                         | Rheumatoid arthritis                                                                                                                                           | Atopic dermatitis                                             | RA                                                                        | MS                                                                                                                                               | Highly active relapsing- remitting MS                                                         | Relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis                                     | Ischemic stroke                                                                                                    | Steroid-refractory Crohn s disease '                                                                                                           |
| Study focus                                  | BTK inhibition in patients with severe COVID-19                                         | BTK                                                                                                                                                            | JAK inhibition in skin in /uniFB02 ammation                   | JAK inhibition in RA                                                      | MS                                                                                                                                               | MS                                                                                            | MS                                                                         | Enlimomab Acute Stroke Trial                                                                                       | Crohn s disease '                                                                                                                              |

| Reference (year of publication)   | 132 (2002)                                            | 165 (2005)                                                   | 166 (2016)                           | 167 (2019)          | 168 (2019)                                                                              | 169, 170 (2018)           | 154                                                                             | 171 (2012)     | 172 (1995)        | 173 (2014)    |
|-----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|-------------------|---------------|
| Study type                        | Multicenter placebo- controlled double blinded RCT    | Systematic review                                            | Multicenter RCT                      | RCT                 | Placebo-controlled dose-escalation RCT                                                  | RCT                       |                                                                                 | Meta-analysis  | Multicenter RCT   | Meta-analysis |
| Cell target                       | Leukocytes                                            | Leukocytes (efalizumab); systemic (TNF)                      | Leukocytes                           |                     |                                                                                         | Systemic                  | NK cells, eosinophils, T cells, B cells, and, to some extent, endothelial cells | Systemic       | Systemic          | Systemic      |
| Molecular/ cellular target        | CD11/CD18 (humanized Ab)                              | LFA-1 (efalizumab), TNF- a (in /uniFB02 iximab, etanercept), | Adhesion                             | NETosis, chemotaxis |                                                                                         | Endotoxin elimination     | a b 4 7 inhibitor (Madcam receptor)                                             |                |                   |               |
| Substance/ intervention           | Rovelizumab ( 5 LeukArrest)                           | Alefacept, efalizumab, etanercept, in /uniFB02 iximab        | Li /uniFB01 tegrast (LFA-1 antibody) | Simvastatin         | Antiprogrammed cell death-ligand 1 antibody (hinders binding of PD-L1 to PD-1 and CD80) | Polymyxin B hemoperfusion | Madcam-1 receptor ( a b 4 7 integrin) antibody                                  | TNF- a blocker | TNF blocker (mAb) | TNF blocker   |
| Disease                           | Myocardial infarction with direct primary angioplasty | Psoriasis                                                    | Dry eye disease                      | Pneumonia           | Sepsis                                                                                  | Severe sepsis             | Ulcerative colitis, Crohn s disease '                                           | RA             | Septic shock      | Sepsis        |
| Study focus                       | HALT-MI study                                         | Meta-analysis for moderate to severe psoriasis               | Dry eye disease                      | Pneumonia           | BMS-936559 study                                                                        | Sepsis                    | Crohn s disease '                                                               | RA             | Septic shock      | Sepsis        |

signaling component also contributes to the ef /uniFB01 cient extravasation of neutrophils in different models, such as hypersensitivityinduced skin in /uniFB02 ammation or lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-triggered in /uniFB02 ammation. 49 Overall, neutrophils seem to favor the route of least resistance in their extravasation, because they probe the surrounding surface for large pores to engage in repositioning. 50 In addition to these biomechanics cues, crawling and transmigration are differentially affected by a chemokine-milieu of CXCL-1 and CXCL-2, in that CXCL-1 is the major regulator of intravascular and subluminal crawling, whereas CXCL-2 and ACKR1 mediate transmigration. 51 Transmigration is followed by an abluminal crawling step, which can be regarded as another cascade-like series of events ultimately resulting in full tissue invasion, once the basement membrane and pericyte layer are breached. 52

Reverse migration Notably, the previously described 1-way route of extravasation is also accessible in an abluminal-to-luminal direction, because neutrophils are capable of re-entering the bloodstream in a process termed ' reverse transendothelial migration ' (rTEM). 53 This process is driven by LTB4, neutrophil elastase, and Mac-1, which together lead to the proteolytic cleavage of JAM-C, allowing neutrophils to re-enter the bloodstream. 54,55 Further regulatory factors involve activation of the hypoxic factor 1 a subunit as a negative regulator and coldinducible RNA-binding protein as a positive regulator of rTEM of neutrophils. 56,57 The reverse migratory step is crucially dependent on chemokine gradients, because de /uniFB01 ciency of the chemokine receptor CXCR2 reduces neutrophil rTEM. 58 Overall, rTEM results in neutrophil phenotype switching toward an activated morphology. 59 Reverse transmigrated neutrophils may lodge in remote organs, such as the lung, leading to vascular leaks at sites distant from the original in /uniFB02 ammatory injury (Figure 2B). 60 Notably, in zebra /uniFB01 sh, reverse transmigration also occurs during wound healing, which is at least partially dependent on the presence of macrophages that mediate the resolution of neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration. 61,62 Neutrophil reverse migration has been regarded as a cornerstone of resolution of in /uniFB02 ammation in wound healing. 63 Therefore, these /uniFB01 ndings could imply that lodging of preactivated neutrophils in remote organs is the unwanted consequence of ongoing/uncontrolled resolution processes, including reverse migration, at sites of in /uniFB02 ammation. 62 Because neutrophils need to access the circulatory system to return to the circulation, tissue-disrupting factors must be considered. Indeed, in a model of sterile hepatic wounding in the mouse, although neutrophil primary extravasation was not impacted by the absence of cathepsin C, neutrophil reverse transmigration crucially depended on serine protease activity, affecting organ revascularization. 64 Notably, reverse transmigration also occurs in other leukocyte subsets, such as monocytes, and has been linked to phenotypic differences in mature dendritic cells (reverse migrated) compared with macrophages (remaining and not engaging in rTEM). 65

Tissue migration Once the neutrophil has breached the basement membrane barrier to enter the interstitium, it engages in a different ' amoeboid ' form of migration that requires cellular deformation, actin polymerization, and structural tissue reorganization. 66 The mechanisms regulating amoeboid interstitial migration are distinct from those controlling intravascular adhesion/ migration. For example, de /uniFB01 ciency in the unconventional class I myosin 1f does not affect migration along 2-dimensional

surfaces, such as endothelial crawling, but it does block successful migration of neutrophils in 3-dimensional collagen networks. 67 During interstitial migration, neutrophils release proteases to degrade matrix elements while also repositioning their nucleus, propelling themselves forward through distinct collagen network pores. 68 In contrast to 2-dimensional intraluminal crawling in which serine proteinases control cell surface adhesion molecules (eg, CD44), matrix metalloproteinases play the dominant role in tissue remodeling during interstitial migration. 66 Nonetheless, the migration of neutrophils in interstitial tissue can also occur in a protease-independent fashion via persistent rearward polarization of F-actin. 69

Effector functions Once neutrophils are recruited to the site of infection, combatting of invading pathogens is required. For this purpose, the neutrophil is equipped with a repertoire of effector functions, such as phagocytosis, NETosis, reactive oxygen species production, and granule secretion. These effector functions can be induced by transmigration of neutrophils, in which they take on a preactivated phenotype. 70,71 Regulators of integrin signaling (eg, Src kinase-associated phosphoprotein 2) that modulate inside-out integrin activation equally affect outside-in signaling responses (eg, phagocytosis of bacterial particles), emphasizing the dual contribution of integrins and integrin regulators to recruitment and effector functions. 72 As another signaling element, calcium shuttling plays a major role in ef /uniFB01 cient phagocytosis, because absence of the calcium sensor STIM1 signi /uniFB01 cantly decreases the phagocytosis of Staphylococcus aureus particles. 73 A rather surprising observation is the effect of L-selectin shedding, which occurs regularly during neutrophil activation, on outside-in -mediated effector functions. Herein, ADAMTS17 based L-selectin shedding enhances phagocytosis, bacterial clearance, and tissue navigation of neutrophils in infected tissue. 74

In addition to this direct ' eating ' response toward bacterial particles, another effector component, NETs, is needed to combat and trap invading pathogens, as demonstrated by the use of a novel monoclonal antibody that protects NETs from degradation and which enhances outcome in preclinical sepsis models. 75 Also, sterile in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, liver injury, and kidney damage, are impacted by NETs, because excessive NETosis can result in organ damage. 76-78

## Overarching factors influencing neutrophil functionality and inflammation

## Organ-specific properties and neutrophil pools

Organ-speci /uniFB01 c recruitment patterns of neutrophils have been uncovered over the years. 79-82 Different organs exhibit distinct rheologic, cellular, and receptor properties. For example, the lung and liver feature the recently identi /uniFB01 ed receptor dipeptidase-1, which impacts leukocyte sequestration and the outcome of endotoxemia-related pulmonary in /uniFB02 ammation. 83 Interestingly, the kidney also features distinct recruitment patterns, because the recruitment of neutrophils to the glomerulus does not involve prior rolling of neutrophils but immediate arrest due to platelet -Pselectin. 84 It is tempting to speculate about possible therapeutics that are capable of blocking the organ-speci /uniFB01 c receptors responsible for neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration, which would allow for directed

targeting of these in /uniFB02 ammatory cells to a site of infection, away from, for example, ischemia-reperfusion -injured organs. Major sites of neutrophil interaction, such as the lung, are additionally known to feature neutrophil ' pools ' and capillary-based recruitment patterns (Figure 2B). 85 Thus, although neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration is known to affect organ function, the cell itself is also modulated by its surrounding tissue. Corroborating this notion, Ballesteros et al elegantly demonstrated very recently that neutrophil phenotypes, including longevity, differed according to their target tissues. 86

## Neutrophil heterogeneity and circadian rhythmicity

Originally described as a homogenous population, it is now well accepted that different neutrophil subtypes exist, underscoring the importance of neutrophil heterogeneity for disease-related outcomes. 87 Although the discussion about the origin of these distinct phenotypic features is ongoing, 88 it seems that intrinsic and extrinsic factors contribute to neutrophil diversity. One prominent internal factor is the clock gene Bmal1 (Figure 2C). This factor acts as an internal clock, affecting CXCL2/CXCR2and contrasting CXCR4-dependent processes associated with neutrophil aging and clearance from the circulation. 89 Additionally, external circadian features and tissue-dependent properties affect neutrophils, because clearance from the circulation is impacted by oscillations of interacting molecules, such as P-/Eselectin and VCAM-1, in the bone marrow microvasculature. 90,91 Although circadian rhythms, in general, have long been known, 92,93 and clinical observations highlight the time-of-day variability in in /uniFB02 ammatory-disease presentations, 94-96 therapeutic and clinical approaches (eg, scheduling of surgeries/interventions) incorporating this knowledge remain scarce. 97

## Cellular interplay affecting neutrophils

The interaction of neutrophils with endothelial cells is crucial for activation and recruitment, but other cells also in /uniFB02 uence neutrophil responses. Neutrophils are capable of directly interacting with platelets, megakaryocytes, other leukocytes, tumor cells, and erythrocytes to various degrees, depending on the underlying (disease) model (Figure 2D). 98-101 Although direct erythrocyte-neutrophil interplay occurs primarily in sickle cell disease, platelets are ascribed a more prominent role in the interaction with neutrophils, ' guiding ' them to extravasation sites. 102 Depletion of platelets protects mice from lung injury in a number of models. 103,104 Nonetheless, thrombocytopenia itself is linked to an increased risk for acute respiratory distress syndrome. 105 Also, in the liver, platelets assist in the recruitment of neutrophils to sterile injury sites, a process that is crucial for organ repair. 106 In addition to platelets, neutrophils interact directly with T cells, speci /uniFB01 cally regulatory T cells, which, once stimulated with LPS, provoke the production of interleukin-10 in neutrophils. 107

## Pericytes in the regulation of neutrophil invasion and inflammation

Neutrophil emigration is impacted by endothelial cells, and pericytes are also key contributors to ef /uniFB01 cient neutrophil tissue invasion. 108 It has been known for more than a decade that lowexpression regions/hotspots within the basement membrane are preferred sites for neutrophil emigration. 109 These lowexpression regions are aligned with pericyte gaps and both can

enlarge to a similar extent, controlling neutrophil invasion. 109,110 Neutrophils interact with pericytes in an ICAM-1 dependent -manner by the formation of extensions that lead to interactions with pericyte-based extensions, 111 but con icting reports /uniFB02 exist that question the necessity of neutrophil-interaction for gap enlargement. 110,112 The contractility of pericytes, which has been attributed to the regulation of neutrophil invasion permissiveness, is impacted by endothelial cell -secreted macrophage inhibitory factor, showing the mechanistic interplay of the blood-tissue barrier during neutrophil emigration. 113 Distinct subsets of pericytes, such as NG2 1 pericytes, which can be found in proximity to arterioles and capillaries, show unique expression characteristics, offering in /uniFB02 ammatory sensors, such as tumor necrosis factor receptor, Toll-like receptors, and formyl peptide receptor 2. These pericytes lead to increased migratory velocity and altered invasive characteristics (including regulation of matrix metalloproteinases) of neutrophils by macrophage inhibitory factor and CXCL8. 114 Although pericytes are well recognized for their contribution to the regulation of neutrophil invasion, therapeutic endeavors remain scarce and demand further mechanistic research.

## Translational considerations

For clinicians, understanding the underlying mechanisms of neutrophil recruitment is highly important (Figures 1, 3, and 4). As described above, in /uniFB02 ammation impacts neutrophil activation responses, 115 and the course of in /uniFB02 ammatory conditions relies on neutrophil functionality and neutrophil activation. 116-118 Therapeutic and diagnostic approaches are underway to speci /uniFB01 cally target neutrophils in in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases.

## Targeting the classical recruitment cascade

Selectins Selectins are prominently involved in the primary steps of neutrophil recruitment. From a translational point of view, although preclinical (swine) 119 and clinical data from a pilot study suggested favorable application of an E-selectin antibody in patients with septic shock, 120 primate data using Eand L-selectin antibodies did not reveal any bene /uniFB01 t in lung injury or mortality in a sepsis model. 121 Because involvement of P-selectin in neutrophil-dependent lung injury has long been known, 122 applicability of P-selectin blockage in patients with COVID-19 is being discussed. 123 Nonetheless, the necessity of selectins and selectin ligands for ef /uniFB01 cient immune defense is seen in patients presenting with leukocyte adhesion de /uniFB01 ciency type 2; they show impaired leukocyte rolling due to a fucosylation defect of selectin ligands. 124

Integrin activation and neutrophil adhesion Studies using genetically engineered mice resulting in integrin hyper- or hypoactivation, as well as utilization of blocking antibodies in disease models, demonstrate the involvement of integrin functionality in acute in /uniFB02 ammatory disease models, such as pneumonia, sepsis, and acute kidney injury. 125-129 Overall, blocking or genetic targeting of integrins seems to be promising in animal studies, but it fails to show outcome-relevant effects in humans or results in major adverse events. Studies targeting the Mac-1 and LFA-1 ligand ICAM-1 using an antibody or antisense oligonucleotide yielded negative results in ischemic stroke and steroid-refractory Crohn s ' disease. 130,131 Also, when directly targeting CD18containing integrins, the results for myocardial infarction were

negative, 132 whereas preclinical data for polymicrobial sepsis showed reduced lung damage following antibody blocking of Mac-1 and LFA-1. 126 Nonetheless, causality of therapeutics is dif /uniFB01 cult to determine because of the involvement of various cell populations and the inability to distinguish between the different recruitment steps in which integrins are involved. 133 Notably, various adverse events have been reported in leukocyte-related studies (eg, the ICAM-1 -blocking antibody enlimomab resulted in an increased rate of infections) (Table 1). 130

Crawling and migration Blocking of leukocyte integrins LFA1/Mac-1 or ICAM-1 reduces transendothelial migration similar to the blocking of CXCL-1 or CXCL-2 that results in diminished neutrophil in /uniFB02 ux into the abdominal cavity at early time points in an LPS model. 134,135 Also, human data using a CXCR2 antagonist seems to be promising because it reduces neutrophil in /uniFB02 ux into airways following LPS challenge in healthy volunteers and is under debate for treatment of COVID-19. 136,137 With regard to neutrophils undergoing rTEM, these cells impact vascular leakage at sites distant from the original in /uniFB02 ammatory injury, but clinical targeting of the speci /uniFB01 c cells is not yet possible. 60

Effector functions Priming of neutrophils for anti-infectious purposes, while at the same time limiting host tissue damage, holds great potential for a future in which increasing microbial antibiotic resistance must be considered. Because the integrin Mac-1 is needed for anti-infectious purposes, as well as the prevention of immunopathology, a novel Mac-1 antibody that speci /uniFB01 cally targets the interaction of CD40L with Mac-1 was developed. Animals treated with this antibody show reduced neutrophil recruitment, thus limiting organ damage but preserving antimicrobial functions. 138

## Inborn neutrophil defects

Consequences of neutrophil dysfunction can be observed in patients with speci /uniFB01 c mutations. Genetic mutations affecting neutrophils were summarized recently. 139 Prominent examples are leukocyte adhesion de /uniFB01 ciencies and actinopathies, such as Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome or coronin-1A de /uniFB01 ciency, which result in impressive phenotypes when it comes to neutrophil morphodynamics. 140 Leukocyte adhesion de /uniFB01 ciencies are rare mutations affecting b 2-integrin functionality via mutations within the integrin gene itself (type 1), defects in selectin ligand posttranslational modi cation /uniFB01 (type 2), or mutations within the kindlin-3 gene (type 3). 141 These mutations lead to recurrent infections due to leukocyte recruitment defects. 142-144 Another mutation affecting neutrophil functions is gain-of-function mutations of WASp, which lead to X-linked neutropenia. This disease is associated with neutropenia, and neutrophils show a hyperactivated phenotype with WASp activity uncoupled from its regulation by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. 145

## Consideration of circadian rhythmicity

As stated above, circadian rhythms are fundamental regulators of neutrophil receptor expression, numbers, and tissue homing. Although these /uniFB01 ndings are of great interest for the scienti /uniFB01 c community, neutrophil-related translational endeavors are scarce. Rescheduling of surgeries or therapeutic interventions based on considerations of wanted/unwanted in /uniFB02 ammatory consequences cannot be observed in regular hospital care, although awareness for increased cardiovascular disease risk is

being raised in shift workers, for example. 146 Current endeavors in circadian rhythmicity -related therapies focus on chronotherapy, light therapy, and sleep interventions. 97 Of note, neutrophil in /uniFB02 ammatory responses are affected by circadian rhythms, as well as an in /uniFB02 ammatory trigger itself that leads to reorganization of circadian rhythms in preclinical animal models. 147

## COVID-19

In the past year, clinicians worldwide have been confronted with patients infected by SARS-CoV2. Notably, COVID-19 is associated with massive immunothrombotic dysfunctions. Nicolai et al showed that phenotypic changes in neutrophils correlate with disease severity. 148 Additionally, immature band neutrophils can be found in the blood of critically ill patients with COVID-19. 149 Although the observed neutrophil characteristics were rather speci /uniFB01 c for severe COVID-19 cases, it is possible that multipanel assessment of neutrophils might aid in diagnosing and selecting patients for appropriate treatments in other disease settings as well. 150 In this direction, screening for deformability of neutrophils in COVID-19 and long-COVID-19 patients revealed disturbed biomechanics properties with diagnostic implications. 151 Different anti-in /uniFB02 ammatory strategies have been proposed by researchers and clinicians, such as studying the effects of tumor necrosis factor blockade 152 or blocking neutrophil NET formation in the lung. 153 Not all anti-in /uniFB02 ammatory approaches have worked, possibly also as a result of unspeci /uniFB01 city (Table 1).

## Outlook

Current research endeavors focus on the discovery of novel components in signaling, phenotypic switching, and recruitment of neutrophils with the use of multi-omics and next-generation sequencing. Furthermore, available data on clinical trials highlight that a vast number of studies concentrate on better phenotyping of patients, neutrophil subsets, and disease subclasses (eg, sepsis). For the keyword ' neutrophil, ' clinicaltrials.gov lists 2618 completed studies and 800 recruiting studies (last updated on 20 June 2021). The underlying topics are diverse, ranging from NET formation in systemic sclerosis (NCT03374618) to neutrophil phenotypic pro ling /uniFB01 in various patients, such as those with diabetes (NCT02080741), patients postsurgery (NCT03058328), and patients experiencing cardiovascular events (NCT04581057) or sepsis (NCT04103268, NCT02803346). Inhibitor studies include research on neutrophil elastase inhibition in bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (NCT02669251), as well as a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor inhibitor (otilimab) in patients with arthritis (NCT04134728). Additionally, routinely available interventions that include diet or physical activity are being assessed for their implications in in /uniFB02 ammation and neutrophil recruitment. Novel applications for in-use medications (eg, methotrexate) are being studied, and new drugs are being put to the test. In this sense, development of more speci c /uniFB01 integrin modulators that avoid exerting unintended agonistic signaling are on the way. 154 A tremendous boost in translational in /uniFB02 ammatory studies has occurred as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. These /uniFB01 ndings are a big step toward the next level of neutrophil research in which phenotyping will lead to a personalized targeted therapy, also taking into account circadian (dys)regulations and allowing the precise directing of each in /uniFB02 ammatory cell to the infected site away from uninvolved

tissues. 155,156 Additionally, targeted on-off switching of effector functions will help in preventing immunopathology to improve organ function.

## Summary and conclusions

In summary, the recruitment of neutrophils relies on a distinct multifactorial sequence of events that requires selectins, integrins, accessible ligands, appropriate chemokine milieus, cell-cell interactions, and different signaling cascades in the cells. Current evidence shows that the previously reported 1-way street of leukocyte recruitment is, in fact, a 2-way road by which neutrophils can reenter the circulation and cause organ damage, even at a remote location in the body. The regulation of each step for the successful in /uniFB01 ltration of neutrophils is crucially impacted by integrin interactors and chemokine gradients. Recruitment, numbers, and phenotypes of neutrophils are affected by circulating chemokines and cytokines, and consumption, reproduction, and mobilization of neutrophil pools also must be considered when interpreting the full magnitude of circulating neutrophil populations. Thus, it appears that we are still on the brink of understanding the complex interplay of in /uniFB02 ammation, stressors, resolution, and the variety of functions that neutrophils exert. Thus, future research is needed to optimize diagnostic options for neutrophil subpopulations, and large randomized controlled trials are crucially needed to address immunomodulatory therapeutics that are individualized for speci /uniFB01 c patient subsets.

## REFERENCES

- 1. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The third international consensus de nitions for sepsis and septic shock /uniFB01 (Sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016;315(8):801-810.
- 2. Stiel L, Meziani F, Helms J. Neutrophil activation during septic shock. Shock. 2018;49(4):371-384.
- 3. Ley K, Laudanna C, Cybulsky MI, Nourshargh S. Getting to the site of in /uniFB02 ammation: the leukocyte adhesion cascade updated. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007; 7(9):678-689.
- 4. Kubes P, Kerfoot SM. Leukocyte recruitment in the microcirculation: the rolling paradigm revisited. News Physiol Sci. 2001;16(2):76-80.
- 5. Herter J, Zarbock A. Integrin regulation during leukocyte recruitment. J Immunol. 2013;190(9):4451-4457.
- 6. Margraf A, Ley K, Zarbock A. Neutrophil recruitment: from model systems to tissue-speci /uniFB01 c patterns. Trends Immunol. 2019;40(7):613-634.
- 7. Springer TA. Traf /uniFB01 c signals for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emigration: the multistep paradigm. Cell. 1994;76(2):301-314.
- 8. Springer TA. Adhesion receptors of the immune system. Nature. 1990; 346(6283):425-434.
- 9. Butcher EC. Leukocyte-endothelial cell recognition: three (or more) steps to speci /uniFB01 city and diversity. Cell. 1991; 67(6):1033-1036.

## Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (KFO342, ZA428/18-1, ZA428/14-1, ZA 428/12-1, INST 211/984-1, INST 211/604-3 [to A.Z.]; MA 9604/1-1 [to A.M.]) and the Interdisziplinares  Zentrum fur  Klinische Forschung Munster (SEED 12/18  [to A.M.] and Za2/001/18 [to A.Z.]).

## Authorship

Contribution: A.M. wrote and designed the outline of the manuscript; C.A.L. wrote the manuscript; and A.Z. supervised the study and wrote and designed the outline of the manuscript.

Con ict-of-interest disclosure: The authors declare no competing /uniFB02 /uniFB01 nancial interests.

ORCID pro les: A.M., 0000-0002-6539-6478; C.A.L., 0000-0002-0467/uniFB01 7073.

Correspondence: Alexander Zarbock, Department of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care Medicine and Pain Therapy, University of Munster,  Albert-Schweitzer Campus 1, Building A1, Munster 48149, Germany;  e-mail: zarbock@uni-muenster.de.

## Footnote

Submitted 27 April 2021; accepted 5 October 2021; prepublished online on Blood First Edition 8 October 2021. DOI 10.1182/ blood.2021012295.

- 10. Laudanna C, Kim JY, Constantin G, Butcher E. Rapid leukocyte integrin activation by chemokines. Immunol Rev. 2002;186(1):37-46.
- 11. Zimmerman BJ, Paulson JC, Arrhenius TS, Gaeta FC, Granger DN. Thrombin receptor peptide-mediated leukocyte rolling in rat mesenteric venules: roles of P-selectin and sialyl Lewis X. Am J Physiol. 1994; 267(3 Pt 2):H1049-H1053.
- 12. Simon SI, Neelamegham S, Taylor A, Smith CW. The multistep process of homotypic neutrophil aggregation: a review of the molecules and effects of hydrodynamics. Cell Adhes Commun. 1998;6(2-3):263-276.
- 13. Simon SI, Chambers JD, Butcher E, Sklar LA. Neutrophil aggregation is beta 2-integrinand L-selectin-dependent in blood and isolated cells. J Immunol. 1992; 149(8):2765-2771.
- 14. von Andrian UH, Chambers JD, McEvoy LM, Bargatze RF, Arfors KE, Butcher EC. Two-step model of leukocyte-endothelial cell interaction in in /uniFB02 ammation: distinct roles for LECAM-1 and the leukocyte beta 2 integrins in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1991;88(17):7538-7542.
- 15. Takeishi N, Imai Y, Nakaaki K, Yamaguchi T, Ishikawa T. Leukocyte margination at arteriole shear rate. Physiol Rep. 2014; 2(6):e12037.
- 16. Fedosov DA, Fornleitner J, Gompper G. Margination of white blood cells in microcapillary /uniFB02 ow. Phys Rev Lett. 2012; 108(2):028104.
- 17. Eriksson EE, Xie X, Werr J, Thoren P, Lindbom L. Importance of primary capture and L-selectin-dependent secondary
- capture in leukocyte accumulation in in /uniFB02 ammation and atherosclerosis in vivo. J Exp Med. 2001;194(2):205-218.
- 18. Kunkel EJ, Ley K. Distinct phenotype of Eselectin-de /uniFB01 cient mice. E-selectin is required for slow leukocyte rolling in vivo. Circ Res. 1996;79(6):1196-1204.
- 19. Mayadas TN, Johnson RC, Rayburn H, Hynes RO, Wagner DD. Leukocyte rolling and extravasation are severely compromised in P selectin-de /uniFB01 cient mice. Cell. 1993;74(3):541-554.
- 20. Diacovo TG, Roth SJ, Buccola JM, Bainton DF, Springer TA. Neutrophil rolling, arrest, and transmigration across activated, surface-adherent platelets via sequential action of P-selectin and the beta 2-integrin CD11b/CD18. Blood. 1996;88(1):146-157.
- 21. Olofsson AM, Arfors KE, Ramezani L, Wolitzky BA, Butcher EC, von Andrian UH. E-selectin mediates leukocyte rolling in interleukin-1-treated rabbit mesentery venules. Blood. 1994;84(8):2749-2758.
- 22. Sperandio M, Gleissner CA, Ley K. Glycosylation in immune cell traf /uniFB01 cking. Immunol Rev. 2009;230(1):97-113.
- 23. Sperandio M, Frommhold D, Babushkina I, et al. Alpha 2,3-sialyltransferase-IV is essential for L-selectin ligand function in in /uniFB02 ammation. Eur J Immunol. 2006; 36(12):3207-3215.
- 24. Kuwano Y, Spelten O, Zhang H, Ley K, Zarbock A. Rolling on E- or P-selectin induces the extended but not high-af /uniFB01 nity conformation of LFA-1 in neutrophils. Blood. 2010;116(4):617-624.

- 25. Ma YQ, Plow EF, Geng JG. P-selectin binding to P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 induces an intermediate state of alphaMbeta2 activation and acts cooperatively with extracellular stimuli to support maximal adhesion of human neutrophils. Blood. 2004;104(8):2549-2556.
- 26. Vadillo E, Chanez-Paredes S, Vargas-Robles /C19 H, et al. Intermittent rolling is a defect of the extravasation cascade caused by Myosin1ede ciency in neutrophils. /uniFB01 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2019;116(52):26752 26758. -
- 27. Snapp KR, Heitzig CE, Kansas GS. Attachment of the PSGL-1 cytoplasmic domain to the actin cytoskeleton is essential for leukocyte rolling on P-selectin. Blood. 2002;99(12):4494-4502.
- 28. Sundd P, Gutierrez E, Koltsova EK, et al. ' Slings ' enable neutrophil rolling at high shear. Nature. 2012;488(7411):399-403.
- 29. Marki A, Buscher K, Lorenzini C, et al. Elongated neutrophil-derived structures are blood-borne microparticles formed by rolling neutrophils during sepsis. J Exp Med. 2021;218(3):e20200551.
- 30. Topham MK, Carveth HJ, McIntyre TM, Prescott SM, Zimmerman GA. Human endothelial cells regulate polymorphonuclear leukocyte degranulation. FASEB J. 1998; 12(9):733-746.
- 31. Lawrence MB, Springer TA. Leukocytes roll on a selectin at physiologic /uniFB02 ow rates: distinction from and prerequisite for adhesion through integrins. Cell. 1991; 65(5):859-873.
- 32. Fagerholm SC, Guenther C, Llort Asens M, Savinko T, Uotila LM. Beta2-integrins and interacting proteins in leukocyte traf /uniFB01 cking, immune suppression, and immunode /uniFB01 ciency disease. Front Immunol. 2019;10:254.
- 33. Bailey WP, Cui K, Ardell CL, et al. Frontline Science: The expression of integrin a D b 2 (CD11d/CD18) on neutrophils orchestrates the defense mechanism against endotoxemia and sepsis. J Leukoc Biol. 2021;109(5):877-890.
- 34. Lewis SM, Treacher DF, Edgeworth J, et al. Expression of CD11c and EMR2 on neutrophils: potential diagnostic biomarkers for sepsis and systemic in /uniFB02 ammation. Clin Exp Immunol. 2015; 182(2):184-194.
- 35. Wen L, Marki A, Roy P, et al. Kindlin-3 recruitment to the plasma membrane precedes high af /uniFB01 nity beta2 integrin and neutrophil arrest from rolling. Blood. 2021; 137(1):29-38.
- 36. Klapproth S, Sperandio M, Pinheiro EM, et al. Loss of the Rap1 effector RIAM results in leukocyte adhesion de /uniFB01 ciency due to impaired b 2 integrin function in mice. Blood. 2015;126(25):2704-2712.
- 37. Gingras AR, Lagarrigue F, Cuevas MN, et al. Rap1 binding and a lipid-dependent helix in talin F1 domain promote integrin activation in tandem. J Cell Biol. 2019; 218(6):1799-1809.
- 38. Margraf A, Germena G, Drexler HCA, et al. The integrin-linked kinase is required for

- chemokine-triggered high-af /uniFB01 nity conformation of the neutrophil b 2-integrin LFA-1. Blood. 2020;136(19):2200-2205.
- 39. Hibbs ML, Xu H, Stacker SA, Springer TA. Regulation of adhesion of ICAM-1 by the cytoplasmic domain of LFA-1 integrin beta subunit. Science. 1991;251(5001):1611-1613.
- 40. Johnston B, Kubes P. The alpha4-integrin: an alternative pathway for neutrophil recruitment? Immunol Today. 1999; 20(12):545-550.
- 41. Kitayama J, Ikeda S, Kumagai K, Saito H, Nagawa H. Alpha 6 beta 1 integrin (VLA-6) mediates leukocyte tether and arrest on laminin under physiological shear /uniFB02 ow. Cell Immunol. 2000;199(2):97-103.
- 42. Bohnsack JF. CD11/CD18-independent neutrophil adherence to laminin is mediated by the integrin VLA-6. Blood. 1992;79(6):1545-1552.
- 43. Margraf A, Cappenberg A, Vadillo E, et al. ArhGAP15, a RacGAP, acts as a temporal signaling regulator of Mac-1 af /uniFB01 nity in sterile in /uniFB02 ammation. J Immunol. 2020;205(5):1365-1375.
- 44. Zhang H, Schaff UY, Green CE, et al. Impaired integrin-dependent function in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein-de /uniFB01 cient murine and human neutrophils. Immunity. 2006;25(2):285-295.
- 45. Yolland L, Burki M, Marcotti S, et al. Persistent and polarized global actin /uniFB02 ow is essential for directionality during cell migration. Nat Cell Biol. 2019;21(11):1370-1381.
- 46. Phillipson M, Heit B, Colarusso P, Liu L, Ballantyne CM, Kubes P. Intraluminal crawling of neutrophils to emigration sites: a molecularly distinct process from adhesion in the recruitment cascade. J Exp Med. 2006;203(12):2569-2575.
- 47. Gorina R, Lyck R, Vestweber D, Engelhardt B. b 2 integrin-mediated crawling on endothelial ICAM-1 and ICAM-2 is a prerequisite for transcellular neutrophil diapedesis across the in /uniFB02 amed blood-brain barrier. J Immunol. 2014;192(1):324-337.
- 48. Yeh YT, Serrano R, Franc ois J, et al. Threedimensional forces exerted by leukocytes and vascular endothelial cells dynamically facilitate diapedesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2018;115(1):133-138.
- 49. Dudeck J, Kotrba J, Immler R, et al. Directional mast cell degranulation of tumor necrosis factor into blood vessels primes neutrophil extravasation. Immunity. 2021;54(3):468-483.e5.
- 50. Renkawitz J, Kopf A, Stopp J, et al. Nuclear positioning facilitates amoeboid migration along the path of least resistance. Nature. 2019;568(7753):546-550.
- 51. Girbl T, Lenn T, Perez L, et al. Distinct compartmentalization of the chemokines CXCL1 and CXCL2 and the atypical receptor ACKR1 determine discrete stages of neutrophil diapedesis. Immunity. 2018; 49(6):1062-1076.e6.
- 52. Voisin MB, Nourshargh S. Neutrophil transmigration: emergence of an adhesive
- cascade within venular walls. J Innate Immun. 2013;5(4):336-347.
- 53. Nourshargh S, Renshaw SA, Imhof BA. Reverse migration of neutrophils: where, when, how, and why? Trends Immunol. 2016;37(5):273-286.
- 54. Wood n A, Voisin MB, Beyrau M, et al. The /uniFB01 junctional adhesion molecule JAM-C regulates polarized transendothelial migration of neutrophils in vivo. Nat Immunol. 2011; 12(8):761-769.
- 55. Colom B, Bodkin JV, Beyrau M, et al. Leukotriene B4-neutrophil elastase axis drives neutrophil reverse transendothelial cell migration in vivo. Immunity. 2015; 42(6):1075-1086.
- 56. Elks PM, van Eeden FJ, Dixon G, et al. Activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 a (Hif-1 a ) delays in /uniFB02 ammation resolution by reducing neutrophil apoptosis and reverse migration in a zebra /uniFB01 sh in /uniFB02 ammation model. Blood. 2011;118(3):712-722.
- 57. Jin H, Aziz M, Ode Y, Wang P. CIRP induces neutrophil reverse transendothelial migration in sepsis. Shock. 2019;51(5):548-556.
- 58. Powell D, Tauzin S, Hind LE, Deng Q, Beebe DJ, Huttenlocher A. Chemokine signaling and the regulation of bidirectional leukocyte migration in interstitial tissues. Cell Rep. 2017; 19(8):1572-1585.
- 59. Ellett F, Elks PM, Robertson AL, Ogryzko NV, Renshaw SA. De ning the phenotype of /uniFB01 neutrophils following reverse migration in zebra /uniFB01 sh. J Leukoc Biol. 2015;98(6):975-981.
- 60. Wu D, Zeng Y, Fan Y, et al. Reversemigrated neutrophils regulated by JAM-C are involved in acute pancreatitisassociated lung injury. Sci Rep. 2016; 6(1):20545.
- 61. Tauzin S, Starnes TW, Becker FB, Lam PY, Huttenlocher A. Redox and Src family kinase signaling control leukocyte wound attraction and neutrophil reverse migration. J Cell Biol. 2014;207(5):589-598.
- 62. de Oliveira S, Rosowski EE, Huttenlocher A. Neutrophil migration in infection and wound repair: going forward in reverse. Nat Rev Immunol. 2016;16(6):378-391.
- 63. Mathias JR, Perrin BJ, Liu TX, Kanki J, Look AT, Huttenlocher A. Resolution of in /uniFB02 ammation by retrograde chemotaxis of neutrophils in transgenic zebra /uniFB01 sh. J Leukoc Biol. 2006;80(6):1281-1288.
- 64. Wang J, Hossain M, Thanabalasuriar A, Gunzer M, Meininger C, Kubes P. Visualizing the function and fate of neutrophils in sterile injury and repair. Science. 2017;358(6359):111-116.
- 65. Muller WA, Randolph GJ. Migration of leukocytes across endothelium and beyond: molecules involved in the transmigration and fate of monocytes. J Leukoc Biol. 1999;66(5):698-704.
- 66. Lerchenberger M, Uhl B, Stark K, et al. Matrix metalloproteinases modulate ameboid-like migration of neutrophils

- through in /uniFB02 amed interstitial tissue. Blood. 2013;122(5):770-780.
- 67. Salvermoser M, Pick R, Weckbach LT, et al. Myosin 1f is speci /uniFB01 cally required for neutrophil migration in 3D environments during acute in /uniFB02 ammation. Blood. 2018; 131(17):1887-1898.
- 68. Salvermoser M, Begandt D, Alon R, Walzog B. Nuclear deformation during neutrophil migration at sites of in /uniFB02 ammation. Front Immunol. 2018;9:2680.
- 69. Barros-Becker F, Lam PY, Fisher R, Huttenlocher A. Live imaging reveals distinct modes of neutrophil and macrophage migration within interstitial tissues. J Cell Sci. 2017;130(22):3801-3808.
- 70. Weninger W, Biro M, Jain R. Leukocyte migration in the interstitial space of nonlymphoid organs. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014; 14(4):232-246.
- 71. Nourshargh S, Marelli-Berg FM. Transmigration through venular walls: a key regulator of leukocyte phenotype and function. Trends Immunol. 2005; 26(3):157-165.
- 72. Boras M, Volmering S, Bokemeyer A, et al. Skap2 is required for b 2 integrin-mediated neutrophil recruitment and functions. J Exp Med. 2017;214(3):851-874.
- 73. Clemens RA, Chong J, Grimes D, Hu Y, Lowell CA. STIM1 and STIM2 cooperatively regulate mouse neutrophil store-operated calcium entry and cytokine production. Blood. 2017;130(13):1565-1577.
- 74. Cappenberg A, Margraf A, Thomas K, et al. L-selectin shedding affects bacterial clearance in the lung: a new regulatory pathway for integrin outside-in signaling. Blood. 2019;134(17):1445-1457.
- 75. Gollomp K, Sarkar A, Harikumar S, et al. Fcmodi ed HIT-like monoclonal antibody as a /uniFB01 novel treatment for sepsis. Blood. 2020; 135(10):743-754.
- 76. Carmona-Rivera C, Carlucci PM, Goel RR, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps mediate articular cartilage damage and enhance cartilage component immunogenicity in rheumatoid arthritis. JCI Insight. 2020; 5(13):e139388.
- 77. Kolaczkowska E, Jenne CN, Surewaard BG, et al. Molecular mechanisms of NET formation and degradation revealed by intravital imaging in the liver vasculature. Nat Commun. 2015;6(1):6673.
- 78. Nakazawa D, Kumar SV, Marschner J, et al. Histones and neutrophil extracellular traps enhance tubular necrosis and remote organ injury in ischemic AKI. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28(6):1753-1768.
- 79. Petri B, Phillipson M, Kubes P. The physiology of leukocyte recruitment: an in vivo perspective. J Immunol. 2008; 180(10):6439-6446.
- 80. Maas SL, Soehnlein O, Viola JR. Organspeci /uniFB01 c mechanisms of transendothelial neutrophil migration in the lung, liver, kidney, and aorta. Front Immunol. 2018; 9:2739.

- 81. McDonald B, McAvoy EF, Lam F, et al. Interaction of CD44 and hyaluronan is the dominant mechanism for neutrophil sequestration in in /uniFB02 amed liver sinusoids. J Exp Med. 2008;205(4):915-927.
- 82. Kirsebom FCM, Kausar F, Nuriev R, Makris S, Johansson C. Neutrophil recruitment and activation are differentially dependent on MyD88/TRIF and MAVS signaling during RSV infection. Mucosal Immunol. 2019; 12(5):1244-1255.
- 83. Choudhury SR, Babes L, Rahn JJ, et al. Dipeptidase-1 is an adhesion receptor for neutrophil recruitment in lungs and liver. Cell. 2019;178(5):1205-1221.e17.
- 84. Kuligowski MP, Kitching AR, Hickey MJ. Leukocyte recruitment to the in /uniFB02 amed glomerulus: a critical role for plateletderived P-selectin in the absence of rolling. J Immunol. 2006;176(11):6991-6999.
- 85. Yipp BG, Kim JH, Lima R, et al. The lung is a host defense niche for immediate neutrophil-mediated vascular protection. Sci Immunol. 2017;2(10):eaam8929.
- 86. Ballesteros I, Rubio-Ponce A, Genua M, et al. Co-option of neutrophil fates by tissue environments. Cell. 2020; 183(5):1282-1297.e18.
- 87. Ng LG, Ostuni R, Hidalgo A. Heterogeneity of neutrophils. Nat Rev Immunol. 2019; 19(4):255-265.
- 88. Silvestre-Roig C, Fridlender ZG, Glogauer M, Scapini P. Neutrophil diversity in health and disease. Trends Immunol. 2019; 40(7):565-583.
- 89. Adrover JM, Del Fresno C, Crainiciuc G, et al. A neutrophil timer coordinates immune defense and vascular protection [published correction appears in Immunity . 2019;51(5):966 -967]. Immunity. 2019; 50(2):390-402.e10.
- 90. Scheiermann C, Kunisaki Y, Lucas D, et al. Adrenergic nerves govern circadian leukocyte recruitment to tissues. Immunity. 2012;37(2):290-301.
- 91. Aroca-Crevillen A, Adrover JM, Hidalgo A. /C19 Circadian features of neutrophil biology. Front Immunol. 2020;11:576.
- 92. Green CB, Takahashi JS, Bass J. The meter of metabolism. Cell. 2008;134(5):728-742.
- 93. Konopka RJ, Benzer S. Clock mutants of Drosophila melanogaster . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1971;68(9):2112-2116.
- 94. Herold M, Gunther R. Circadian rhythm of  C-reactive protein in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1987; 227B:271-279.
- 95. Muller JE, To /uniFB02 er GH, Stone PH. Circadian variation and triggers of onset of acute cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 1989; 79(4):733-743.
- 96. Adrover JM, Aroca-Crevillen A, Crainiciuc /C19 G, et al. Programmed ' disarming ' of the neutrophil proteome reduces the magnitude of in /uniFB02 ammation. Nat Immunol. 2020;21(2):135-144.
- 97. Ruan W, Yuan X, Eltzschig HK. Circadian rhythm as a therapeutic target. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2021;20(4):287-307.
- 98. Zhang D, Xu C, Manwani D, Frenette PS. Neutrophils, platelets, and in /uniFB02 ammatory pathways at the nexus of sickle cell disease pathophysiology. Blood. 2016; 127(7):801-809.
- 99. Minns D, Smith KJ, Hardisty G, Rossi AG, Gwyer Findlay E. The outcome of neutrophil-T cell contact differs depending on activation status of both cell types. Front Immunol. 2021;12:633486.
- 100. Boisset JC, Vivie J, Grun D, Muraro MJ, /C19  Lyubimova A, van Oudenaarden A. Mapping the physical network of cellular interactions. Nat Methods. 2018;15(7):547-553.
- 101. Saini M, Szczerba BM, Aceto N. Circulating tumor cell-neutrophil tango along the metastatic process. Cancer Res. 2019; 79(24):6067-6073.
- 102. Zuchtriegel G, Uhl B, Puhr-Westerheide D, et al. Platelets guide leukocytes to their sites of extravasation. PLoS Biol. 2016; 14(5):e1002459.
- 103. Zarbock A, Singbartl K, Ley K. Complete reversal of acid-induced acute lung injury by blocking of platelet-neutrophil aggregation. J Clin Invest. 2006;116(12):3211-3219.
- 104. Ortiz-Munoz G, Mallavia B, Bins A, Headley ~ M, Krummel MF, Looney MR. Aspirintriggered 15-epi-lipoxin A4 regulates neutrophil-platelet aggregation and attenuates acute lung injury in mice. Blood. 2014; 124(17):2625-2634.
- 105. Wang T, Liu Z, Wang Z, et al. Thrombocytopenia is associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome mortality: an international study. PLoS One. 2014; 9(4):e94124.
- 106. Slaba I, Wang J, Kolaczkowska E, McDonald B, Lee WY, Kubes P. Imaging the dynamic platelet-neutrophil response in sterile liver injury and repair in mice. Hepatology. 2015;62(5):1593-1605.
- 107. Lewkowicz N, Mycko MP, Przygodzka P, et al. Induction of human IL-10-producing neutrophils by LPS-stimulated Treg cells and IL-10. Mucosal Immunol. 2016; 9(2):364-378.
- 108. Rudziak P, Ellis CG, Kowalewska PM. Role and molecular mechanisms of pericytes in regulation of leukocyte diapedesis in in /uniFB02 amed tissues. Mediators In /uniFB02 amm. 2019; 2019(11):1-9.
- 109. Wang S, Voisin MB, Larbi KY, et al. Venular basement membranes contain speci /uniFB01 c matrix protein low expression regions that act as exit points for emigrating neutrophils. J Exp Med. 2006;203(6):1519-1532.
- 110. Proebstl D, Voisin MB, Wood /uniFB01 n A, et al. Pericytes support neutrophil subendothelial cell crawling and breaching of venular walls in vivo. J Exp Med. 2012;209(6):1219-1234.
- 111. Pieper C, Pieloch P, Galla HJ. Pericytes support neutrophil transmigration via interleukin-8 across a porcine co-culture

- model of the blood-brain barrier. Brain Res. 2013;1524:1-11.
- 112. Wang S, Cao C, Chen Z, et al. Pericytes regulate vascular basement membrane remodeling and govern neutrophil extravasation during in /uniFB02 ammation. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45499.
- 113. Pellowe AS, Sauler M, Hou Y, et al. Endothelial cell-secreted MIF reduces pericyte contractility and enhances neutrophil extravasation. FASEB J. 2019; 33(2):2171-2186.
- 114. Stark K, Eckart A, Haidari S, et al. Capillary and arteriolar pericytes attract innate leukocytes exiting through venules and ' instruct ' them with pattern-recognition and motility programs. Nat Immunol. 2013; 14(1):41-51.
- 115. Khawaja AA, Pericleous C, Ripoll VM, Porter JC, Giles IP. Autoimmune rheumatic disease IgG has differential effects upon neutrophil integrin activation that is modulated by the endothelium. Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):1283.
- 116. Chirivi RGS, van Rosmalen JWG, van der Linden M, et al. Therapeutic ACPA inhibits NET formation: a potential therapy for neutrophil-mediated in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases. Cell Mol Immunol. 2021;18(6):1528-1544.
- 117. O Neil LJ, Kaplan MJ. Neutrophils in ' rheumatoid arthritis: breaking immune tolerance and fueling disease. Trends Mol Med. 2019;25(3):215-227.
- 118. Khandpur R, Carmona-Rivera C, Vivekanandan-Giri A, et al. NETs are a source of citrullinated autoantigens and stimulate in /uniFB02 ammatory responses in rheumatoid arthritis. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5(178):178ra40.
- 119. Ridings PC, Bloom /uniFB01 eld GL, Holloway S, et al. Sepsis-induced acute lung injury is attenuated by selectin blockade following the onset of sepsis. Arch Surg. 1995; 130(11):1199-1208.
- 120. Friedman G, Jankowski S, Shahla M, et al. Administration of an antibody to E-selectin in patients with septic shock. Crit Care Med. 1996;24(2):229-233.
- 121. Carraway MS, Welty-Wolf KE, Kantrow SP, et al. Antibody to E- and L-selectin does not prevent lung injury or mortality in septic baboons. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998;157(3 Pt 1):938-949.
- 122. Mulligan MS, Polley MJ, Bayer RJ, Nunn MF, Paulson JC, Ward PA. Neutrophildependent acute lung injury. Requirement for P-selectin (GMP-140). J Clin Invest. 1992;90(4):1600-1607.
- 123. Neri T, Nieri D, Celi A. P-selectin blockade in COVID-19-related ARDS. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2020; 318(6):L1237-L1238.
- 124. von Andrian UH, Berger EM, Ramezani L, et al. In vivo behavior of neutrophils from two patients with distinct inherited leukocyte adhesion de /uniFB01 ciency syndromes. J Clin Invest. 1993;91(6):2893-2897.

- 125. Margraf A, Volmering S, Skupski J, et al. The ITIM domain-containing NK receptor Ly49Q impacts pulmonary infection by mediating neutrophil functions. J Immunol. 2018;200(12):4085-4093.
- 126. Asaduzzaman M, Zhang S, Lavasani S, Wang Y, Thorlacius H. LFA-1 and MAC-1 mediate pulmonary recruitment of neutrophils and tissue damage in abdominal sepsis. Shock. 2008;30(3):254-259.
- 127. Herter JM, Rossaint J, Block H, Welch H, Zarbock A. Integrin activation by P-Rex1 is required for selectin-mediated slow leukocyte rolling and intravascular crawling. Blood. 2013;121(12):2301-2310.
- 128. Block H, Stadtmann A, Riad D, et al. Gnb isoforms control a signaling pathway comprising Rac1, Plc b 2, and Plc b 3 leading to LFA-1 activation and neutrophil arrest in vivo. Blood. 2016;127(3):314-324.
- 129. Yago T, Petrich BG, Zhang N, et al. Blocking neutrophil integrin activation prevents ischemia-reperfusion injury. J Exp Med. 2015;212(8):1267-1281.
- 130. Enlimomab Acute Stroke Trial Investigators. Use of anti-ICAM-1 therapy in ischemic stroke: results of the Enlimomab Acute Stroke Trial. Neurology. 2001;57(8):1428-1434.
- 131. Schreiber S, Nikolaus S, Malchow H, et al; German ICAM-1 Study Group. Absence of ef /uniFB01 cacy of subcutaneous antisense ICAM-1 treatment of chronic active Crohn s disease. ' Gastroenterology. 2001;120(6):1339-1346.
- 132. Faxon DP, Gibbons RJ, Chronos NA, Gurbel PA, Sheehan F; HALT-MI Investigators. The effect of blockade of the CD11/CD18 integrin receptor on infarct size in patients with acute myocardial infarction treated with direct angioplasty: the results of the HALT-MI study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40(7):1199-1204.
- 133. Frijns CJ, Kappelle LJ. In /uniFB02 ammatory cell adhesion molecules in ischemic cerebrovascular disease. Stroke. 2002; 33(8):2115-2122.
- 134. De Filippo K, Dudeck A, Hasenberg M, et al. Mast cell and macrophage chemokines CXCL1/CXCL2 control the early stage of neutrophil recruitment during tissue in /uniFB02 ammation. Blood. 2013; 121(24):4930-4937.
- 135. Furie MB, Tancinco MC, Smith CW. Monoclonal antibodies to leukocyte integrins CD11a/CD18 and CD11b/CD18 or intercellular adhesion molecule-1 inhibit chemoattractant-stimulated neutrophil transendothelial migration in vitro. Blood. 1991;78(8):2089-2097.
- 136. Leaker BR, Barnes PJ, O Connor B. ' Inhibition of LPS-induced airway neutrophilic in /uniFB02 ammation in healthy volunteers with an oral CXCR2 antagonist. Respir Res. 2013;14(1):137.
- 137. Koenig LM, Boehmer DFR, Metzger P, Schnurr M, Endres S, Rothenfusser S. Blocking in /uniFB02 ammation on the way: rationale for CXCR2 antagonists for the treatment of COVID-19. J Exp Med. 2020; 217(9):e20201342.
- 138. Wolf D, Anto-Michel N, Blankenbach H, et al. A ligand-speci /uniFB01 c blockade of the integrin Mac-1 selectively targets pathologic in /uniFB02 ammation while maintaining protective host-defense. Nat Commun. 2018; 9(1):525.
- 139. Ley K, Hoffman HM, Kubes P, et al. Neutrophils: new insights and open questions. Sci Immunol. 2018; 3(30):eaat4579.
- 140. Sprenkeler EGG, Webbers SDS, Kuijpers TW. When actin is not actin ' like it should: a new category of distinct primary immunode ciency disorders. /uniFB01 J Innate Immun. 2020;13(1):3-25.
- 141. Schmidt S, Moser M, Sperandio M. The molecular basis of leukocyte recruitment and its de /uniFB01 ciencies. Mol Immunol. 2013; 55(1):49-58.
- 142. Svensson L, Howarth K, McDowall A, et al. Leukocyte adhesion de /uniFB01 ciency-III is caused by mutations in KINDLIN3 affecting integrin activation. Nat Med. 2009;15(3):306-312.
- 143. McDowall A, Svensson L, Stanley P, et al. Two mutations in the KINDLIN3 gene of a new leukocyte adhesion de /uniFB01 ciency III patient reveal distinct effects on leukocyte function in vitro. Blood. 2010; 115(23):4834-4842.
- 144. Moser M, Bauer M, Schmid S, et al. Kindlin-3 is required for beta2 integrinmediated leukocyte adhesion to endothelial cells. Nat Med. 2009;15(3):300-305.
- 145. Keszei M, Record J, Kritikou JS, et al. Constitutive activation of WASp in X-linked neutropenia renders neutrophils hyperactive. J Clin Invest. 2018;128(9):4115-4131.
- 146. Aziz IS, McMahon AM, Friedman D, Rabinovich-Nikitin I, Kirshenbaum LA, Martino TA. Circadian in /uniFB02 uence on in /uniFB02 ammatory response during cardiovascular disease. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2021;57:60-70.
- 147. Haspel JA, Chettimada S, Shaik RS, et al. Circadian rhythm reprogramming during lung in /uniFB02 ammation. Nat Commun. 2014; 5(1):4753.
- 148. Nicolai L, Leunig A, Brambs S, et al. Immunothrombotic dysregulation in COVID-19 pneumonia is associated with respiratory failure and coagulopathy. circulation. 2020;142(12):1176-1189.
- 149. Vadillo E, Taniguchi-Ponciano K, LopezMacias C, et al. A shift towards an immature myeloid pro /uniFB01 le in peripheral blood of critically ill COVID-19 patients. Arch Med Res. 2021;52(3):311-323.
- 150. Nicolai L, Leunig A, Brambs S, et al. Vascular neutrophilic in /uniFB02 ammation and immunothrombosis distinguish severe COVID-19 from in /uniFB02 uenza pneumonia. J Thromb Haemost. 2021;19(2):574-581.
- 151. Kubankova M, Hohberger B, Hoffmanns J, /C19 /C19 et al. Physical phenotype of blood cells is altered in COVID-19. Biophys J. 2021; 120(14):2838-2847.
- 152. Feldmann M, Maini RN, Woody JN, et al. Trials of anti-tumour necrosis factor therapy

- for COVID-19 are urgently needed. Lancet. 2020;395(10234):1407-1409.
- 153. Godement M, Zhu J, Cerf C, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps in SARS-CoV2 related pneumonia in ICU patients: The NETCOV2 Study. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021;8:615984.
- 154. Cully M. Integrin-targeted therapies branch out. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2020; 19(11):739-741.
- 155. Heming M, Schulte-Mecklenbeck A, Brix T, et al. Immune cell pro /uniFB01 ling of the cerebrospinal /uniFB02 uid provides pathogenetic insights into in /uniFB02 ammatory neuropathies. Front Immunol. 2019;10:515.
- 156. Lohmann L, Janoschka C, SchulteMecklenbeck A, et al. Immune cell pro /uniFB01 ling during switching from natalizumab to /uniFB01 ngolimod reveals differential effects on systemic immune-regulatory networks and on traf /uniFB01 cking of non-T cell populations into the cerebrospinal /uniFB02 uid-results from the ToFingo Successor Study. Front Immunol. 2018;9:1560.
- 157. Roschewski M, Lionakis MS, Sharman JP, et al. Inhibition of Bruton tyrosine kinase in patients with severe COVID-19. Sci Immunol. 2020;5(48):eabd0110.
- 158. Schafer PH, Kivitz AJ, Ma J, et al. Spebrutinib (CC-292) affects markers of B cell activation, chemotaxis, and osteoclasts in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: results from a mechanistic study. Rheumatol Ther. 2020;7(1):101-119.
- 159. Bissonnette R, Papp KA, Poulin Y, et al. Topical tofacitinib for atopic dermatitis: a phase IIa randomized trial. Br J Dermatol. 2016;175(5):902-911.
- 160. Tarrant JM, Galien R, Li W, et al. Filgotinib, a JAK1 inhibitor, modulates disease-related biomarkers in rheumatoid arthritis: results

- from two randomized, controlled phase 2b trials. Rheumatol Ther. 2020;7(1):173-190.
- 161. Montalban X, Arnold DL, Weber MS, et al; Evobrutinib Phase 2 Study Group. Placebocontrolled trial of an oral BTK inhibitor in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2019; 380(25):2406-2417.
- 162. Engelhardt B, Kappos L. Natalizumab: targeting alpha4-integrins in multiple sclerosis. Neurodegener Dis. 2008;5(1):16-22.
- 163. Schwab N, Schneider-Hohendorf T, Wiendl H. Therapeutic uses of antia 4-integrin (anti-VLA-4) antibodies in multiple sclerosis. Int Immunol. 2015;27(1):47-53.
- 164. Miller DH, Weber T, Grove R, et al. Firategrast for relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis: a phase 2, randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2012;11(2):131-139.
- 165. Brimhall AK, King LN, Licciardone JC, Jacobe H, Menter A. Safety and ef /uniFB01 cacy of alefacept, efalizumab, etanercept and in /uniFB02 iximab in treating moderate to severe plaque psoriasis: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Br J Dermatol. 2008;159(2):274-285.
- 166. Nichols KK, Donnenfeld ED, Karpecki PM, et al. Safety and tolerability of li /uniFB01 tegrast ophthalmic solution 5.0%: pooled analysis of /uniFB01 ve randomized controlled trials in dry eye disease. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2019; 29(4):394-401.
- 167. Sapey E, Patel JM, Greenwood H, et al. Simvastatin improves neutrophil function and clinical outcomes in pneumonia. A pilot randomized controlled clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019; 200(10):1282-1293.
- 168. Hotchkiss RS, Colston E, Yende S, et al. Immune checkpoint inhibition in sepsis: a phase 1b randomized, placebo-controlled,
- single ascending dose study of antiprogrammed cell death-ligand 1 antibody (BMS-936559). Crit Care Med. 2019; 47(5):632-642.
- 169. Kuriyama A, Katsura M, Urushidani S, Takada T. Impact of polymyxin B hemoperfusion in the treatment of patients with sepsis and septic shock: a metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Ann Transl Med. 2018;6(11):206.
- 170. Srisawat N, Tungsanga S, Lumlertgul N, et al. The effect of polymyxin B hemoperfusion on modulation of human leukocyte antigen DR in severe sepsis patients. Crit Care. 2018;22(1):279.
- 171. Aaltonen KJ, Virkki LM, Malmivaara A, Konttinen YT, Nordstrom DC, Blom M.  Systematic review and meta-analysis of the ef /uniFB01 cacy and safety of existing TNF blocking agents in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30275.
- 172. Abraham E, Wunderink R, Silverman H, et al. Ef /uniFB01 cacy and safety of monoclonal antibody to human tumor necrosis factor alpha in patients with sepsis syndrome. A randomized, controlled, double-blind, multicenter clinical trial. TNF-alpha MAb Sepsis Study Group. JAMA. 1995;273(12):934-941.
- 173. Qiu P, Cui X, Sun J, Welsh J, Natanson C, Eichacker PQ. Antitumor necrosis factor therapy is associated with improved survival in clinical sepsis trials: a meta-analysis. Crit Care Med. 2013;41(10):2419-2429.
- 2022 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercialNoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other rights reserved.