## Innate immune cell trafficking

## Neutrophils cascading their way to inflammation

## Christian D. Sadik, Nancy D. Kim and Andrew D. Luster

Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA

Neutrophils are pivotal effector cells of innate immunity. Their recruitment into peripheral tissues is indispensable for host defense. Given their destructive potential, neutrophil entry into tissue must be tightly regulated in vivo to avoid damage to the host. An array of chemically diverse chemoattractants is active on neutrophils and participates in recruitment. Neutrophil chemoattractants were thought redundant in the control of neutrophil recruitment into peripheral tissue, based on their often indistinguishable effects on neutrophils in vitro and their frequently overlapping patterns of expression at inflammatory sites in vivo . Recent data, however, suggest that neutrophil chemoattractants have unique functions in the recruitment of neutrophils into inflammatory sites in vivo , dictated by their distinct patterns of temporal and spatial expression .

## Ostensibly redundant role of chemoattractants in recruitment of neutrophils

Neutrophils are essential effector cells of the innate immune response, forming the first line of defense against bacterial and fungal pathogens. The engulfment of pathogens and the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and proteases contribute to the key role of neutrophils in host defense [1]. Accordingly, neutropenia is an alarming condition that renders patients susceptible to fulminant, lifethreatening infections. However, neutrophils also contribute significantly to tissue damage in acute disease processes, such as acute lung injury and spinal cord injuries, as well as in chronic diseases processes, such as rheumatoid arthritis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and asthma [2 12]. The destructive potential of neutro--phils requires the tight control of their recruitment into tissue compartments. Neutrophils are responsive to a plethora of diverse chemoattractants (Table 1) that have similar functions in in vitro studies. In addition, a large number of different chemoattractants are usually present in vivo at sites of inflammation. Thus, overlapping signals are considered to induce neutrophil recruitment in a redundant fashion, to ensure that these crucial innate immunecells quickly and faithfully reach the site of infection. Recent discoveries, however, highlight non-redundant roles for chemoattractants in mouse models of sterile inflammation, suggesting that in vivo chemoattractants

Corresponding author:

Luster, A.D.

collaborate sequentially in temporal and spatial cascades to choreograph the recruitment of neutrophils [13,14]. The absolute requirement for an individual chemoattractant at a specific step in the cascade might come about through unique temporal and/or spatial patterns of expression of the chemoattractant and the corresponding receptor on neutrophils, and through inherent differences in the biophysical properties of chemoattractants. Although the specific chemoattractants, and the order in which they act, probably differ depending on the specific pathological stimulus, the emerging concept of non-redundant cascades of chemoattractants offers the opportunity to tailor drugs meant to hit a chemoattractant or its receptor at a specific place and time, to arrest the cascade and thus inhibit the pathogenic process. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge about the journey of neutrophils from the bone marrow to the inflammatory site. We demonstrate that, on this journey, there are three major decision points presiding over the migratory fate of neutrophils: exit from the bone marrow into the circulation; movement from the blood into the tissue; and eventually, recruitment to the site of inflammation.

## Decision point I: trafficking from bone marrow into peripheral blood

Neutrophils are the most abundant immune cell type. It is estimated that each day 5 /C2 10 10 -10 /C2 10 10 new neutrophils are formed in the bone marrow [15]. A neutrophil spends the majority of its life in the bone marrow: under physiological conditions, &lt; 2% of neutrophils are found in the bloodstream [16]. In the latter location, neutrophils have a short half life ( /C24 6 8 h in humans and -/C24 11 h in mice) [15,17]. Neutrophil homeostasis in peripheral blood is tightly regulated primarily as a consequence of: (i) proliferation/differentiation rate of neutrophil precursors in the bone marrow; (ii) egress of mature neutrophils from the bone marrow into the periphery; and (iii) neutrophil clearance by the reticuloendothelial phagocytic system in the spleen, liver and bone marrow [17].

Neutrophil release form the bone marrow is a rapid way to increase the number of circulating neutrophils available for recruitment into tissue in response to infection or inflammation. Recently, neutrophil egress from the bone marrow into the peripheral blood has been found to be antagonistically regulated by CXC chemokine receptor (CXCR)2 and CXCR4 [16,18 20], which are both expressed -on neutrophils. Although CXCR4 retains neutrophils in the

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Major human and murine neutrophil-active chemoattractants and their receptors expressed on neutrophils.

| Chemoattractant Receptor   | Chemoattractant Receptor         | Chemoattractant Receptor        | Chemoattractant Receptor   | Chemoattractant Receptor   |
|----------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Chemokines                 | Chemokines                       | Chemokines                      | Chemokines                 | Chemokines                 |
| Nomenclature               | Nomenclature                     | Nomenclature                    | Receptors                  | Receptors                  |
| Systematic                 | Human                            | Murine                          | Human neutrophils          | Murine neutrophils         |
| CXCL1                      | GRO a                            | KC                              | CXCR2                      | CXCR2                      |
| CXCL2                      | GRO b                            | MIP-2                           | CXCR2                      | CXCR2                      |
| CXCL3                      | GRO g                            | n/a                             | CXCR2                      | n/a                        |
| CXCL5                      | ENA-78                           | LIX                             | CXCR2                      | CXCR2                      |
| CXCL6                      | GCP-2                            | n/a                             | CXCR1/CXCR2                | n/a                        |
| CXCL7                      | NAP-2                            | NAP-2                           | CXCR1/CXCR2                | CXCR2                      |
| CXCL8                      | IL-8                             | n/a                             | CXCR1/CXCR2                | CXCR2                      |
| CCL3                       | MIP-1 a                          | MIP-1 a                         | n/a                        | CCR1                       |
| CCL5                       | RANTES                           | RANTES                          | n/a                        | CCR1                       |
| CCL6                       | (MPIF-1)                         | C10                             | n/a                        | CCR1                       |
| CCL7                       | MCP-3                            | MARC                            | n/a                        | CCR1                       |
| CCL9                       | (HCC-2)                          | MIP-1 g                         | n/a                        | CCR1                       |
| CXCL12                     | SDF-1 a                          | SDF-1 a                         | CXCR4                      | CXCR4                      |
| Peptides/Cytokines         | Peptides/Cytokines               | Peptides/Cytokines              | Peptides/Cytokines         | Peptides/Cytokines         |
|                            | C5a                              |                                 | C5aR                       |                            |
|                            | C3a                              |                                 |                            | C3aR                       |
|                            | Formylated peptides (e.g. fMLF)  | Formylated peptides (e.g. fMLF) |                            | FPR1                       |
|                            | Pro-Gly-Pro (PGP)                |                                 |                            | CXCR2                      |
|                            | LL37                             |                                 |                            | FPR2                       |
|                            | MIF                              |                                 |                            | CXCR2                      |
| Eicosanoids                | Eicosanoids                      | Eicosanoids                     | Eicosanoids                | Eicosanoids                |
|                            | Leukotriene B4 (LTB4)            |                                 |                            | BLT1                       |
|                            | Platelet activating factor (PAF) |                                 |                            | PAFR                       |

Notes: The human and mouse chemokine system is not completely orthologous For example, IL-8 and GCP-2 are not found in mice; MIP-1 . g is not found in humans; CCR1 is not an important receptor on human neutrophils; and CXCR1 is not an important receptor on murine neutrophils. ''n/a'' stands for non-applicable. HCC-2 and MPIF-1 have also been given the systematic names CCL15 and CCL23, respectively [76].

bone marrow, CXCR2 facilitates their egress. The CXCR4 ligand stromal-cell-derived factor (SDF)-1 [CXC chemokine ligand (CXCL)12] and the CXCR2 ligands KC (CXCL1) and macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-2 (CXCL2) are both constitutively expressed by endothelial cells and osteoblasts in the bone marrow. For SDF-1, however, osteoblasts are the major source, whereas for the CXCR2 ligands, endothelial cells are the major cellular source in the bone marrow. In this permanent tug-of-war between SDF-1 and CXCR2ligands,theformerusuallydominatestoretainmost neutrophils in the bone marrow (Figure 1). The dominance of SDF-1 over CXCR2 ligands in this regulatory network is revealed in the absence of CXCR4, where CXCR2 becomes dispensable for the mobilization of neutrophils from the bone marrow [20]. Mechanistically, heterologous desensitization and internalization of CXCR4 by CXCR2 ligands also contribute to neutrophil mobilization [18]. Therefore, the mobilization of neutrophils from the bone marrow by CXCR2 ligands can be described as inhibition of CXCR4mediated retention. Furthermore, neutrophils in the bone marrow appear to lower their surface expression of CXCR4 in the course of maturation [18], which may be a mechanism to ensure the mobilization of functionally mature neutrophils while retaining less mature ones. Recently, it has been suggested that SDF-1 augments the binding of the a 4 integrin very later antigen (VLA)-4 on neutrophils to (VCAM)-1 on bone marrow endothelial and stromal cells, thus keeping neutrophils in the bone marrow [21]. Combined inhibition of CXCR4 and VLA-4 potentiates the mobilization of neutrophils from the bone marrow, and notably, similar to CXCR4,

VLA-4 expression on neutrophils decreases during maturation. The pivotal role of CXCR4 signaling in the retention of neutrophils in the bone marrow and its regulation by internalization has been revealed in a human disease associated with a group of autosomal dominant mutations of CXCR4, called WHIM syndrome, which is characterized by warts, hypogammaglobulimenia, infections, and myelokathexis [22,23]. Mutations in the carboxy-terminal tail of CXCR4 result in the expression of truncated forms of CXCR4, which are impaired in their desensitization and internalization, and therefore cause an enhanced signaling of CXCR4 [24,25]. Phenotypically, this leads to myelokathexis, a condition characterized by retention of mature neutrophils within the bone marrow and peripheral neutropenia.

In acute inflammation, mobilization of neutrophils from the bone marrow is orchestrated by the hematopoietic cytokine granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). G-CSF mobilizes neutrophils indirectly by shifting the balance between SDF-1 and CXCR2 ligands in the bone marrow. G-CSF does this by reducing the absolute number of osteoblasts, the major cellular source of SDF-1, while simultaneously increasing KC and MIP-2 and decreasing SDF-1 expression in endothelial cells of the bone marrow [16,19]. In addition to mediators produced and released within the bone marrow, inflammatory mediators released in peripheral tissues might also make their way to the bone marrow and modulate neutrophil egress. In thioglycollateinduced peritonitis, for instance, neutrophil blood counts were elevated by 4.5-fold 2 h after intraperitoneal injection of thioglycollate. The elevation was decreased by 84% and

Figure 1 . Regulation of neutrophil egress from the bone marrow by CXCR4 and CXCR2 chemokine ligands. The CXCR4 ligand SDF-1 (CXCL12) functions to retain neutrophils in the bone marrow, whereas the CXCR2 ligands KC (CXCL1) and MIP-2 (CXCL2) promote neutrophil egress. G-CSF mobilizes neutrophils from the bone marrow by increasing the ratio of CXCR4 to CXCR2 ligands in the bone marrow. Neutrophil egress is influenced by the local production of G-CSF and KC within the bone marrow, as well as the release of these mediators from inflamed peripheral tissues.

<!-- image -->

72% when MIP-2 and KC, or G-CSF, respectively, were neutralized before the administration of thioglycollate by intraperitoneal antibody injection [19]. Neutralization of only one chemokine diminished the elevation by approximately 50%. Intraperitoneal injection of MIP-2 or G-CSF mimicked the effect of acute peritonitis on the peripheral neutrophil blood count. Therefore, local peripheral release of chemokines in inflammation might directly affect neutrophil mobilization from the bone marrow. Unlike MIP-2, however, intraperitoneal injection of G-CSF does not induce neutrophil recruitment into the peritoneum. Consistent with this, intraperitoneal injection of MIP-2- and KCneutralizing antibodies also attenuates the influx of neutrophils into the peritoneum after thioglycollate administration, whereas neutralizing G-CSF has no effect on the influx [19]. Thus, chemokines can act locally to induce neutrophil recruitment into peripheral tissue and at distance to induce neutrophil mobilization from the bone marrow (Figure 1).

## Decision point II: entering peripheral tissues or not

Neutrophils in the peripheral blood can be rapidly recruited into peripheral tissues in the event of pathogenic invasion or sterile tissue damage. The disturbance of tissue homeostasis is recognized either by professional tissue-resident sentinel cells, such as macrophages and mast cells, or by stromal cells [26,27]. A panel of diverse stimuli, especially pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMPs) and damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMPs) molecules, activates these sentinel cells to release proinflammatory mediators [e.g. interleukin (IL)-1 b and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)], and neutrophil-active chemoattractants (e.g. chemokines and lipid mediators) [26 -28]. These mediators initiate the recruitment of neutrophils into the tissue by diverse actions.

One initial action of utmost importance is the activation of adhesion molecules on the endothelium neighboring the injury or inflammation for neutrophils to exit the vasculature. It has recently been suggested that neutrophils, rather than taking the shortest linear route through tissues, approach the inflammatory site as closely as possible within the blood vessels. The blood vessels, therefore, apparently function as fast-track transfer routes for neutrophils [14]. Approaching the injured site, neutrophils face a second major migratory decision point /C0 namely, whether or not they should leave the peripheral blood and transmigrate into peripheral tissues. This migration mainly occurs at the postcapillary venules.

Having approached the endothelium, the neutrophils engage in a sequence of physical interactions with endothelial cells, referred to as the leukocyte adhesion cascade, which has been comprehensively reviewed by Williams et al . in this issue [28]. The leukocyte adhesion cascade was originally thought to consist of three distinct steps: rolling, activation, and arrest, followed by diapedesis (transmigration through the endothelium). In recent years, it has become evident that more steps can be distinguished. Now slow rolling, adhesion strengthening, and intraluminal crawling are regarded as additional steps; each requiring different molecular mechanisms [29,30]. Although the adhesion cascade is reversible and can be stopped at any point, transmigration is irreversible. Therefore, decision point II consists of several independent decisions, which are integrated to make the final decision to leave the blood and enter the tissue.

The first step, rolling, is mediated predominantly by selectins, while the b 2-integrins lymphocyte function-associated antigen (LFA)-1 ( a b L 2-integrin) and macrophage-1 antigen (Mac-1) ( a M 2-integrin) mediate adhesion and the b subsequent intraluminal crawling of the neutrophil to an

optimal anatomical site for transmigration, respectively [31]. Thus, each integrin exerts fundamentally different functions, although both bind to endothelial intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1.

When moving over the endothelium, neutrophils are activated by chemokines, which are bound to the endothelium via glycoaminoglycans [32]. Activation of the neutrophil by chemokines enhances the affinity of their b 2integrins for their binding partner and subsequently induces arrest. Activated and arrested, the neutrophils start transmigrating. Neutrophils can transmigrate via the paracellular or the transcellular route, that is, either through junctions between endothelial cells or through an endothelial cell. The former is thought to be the predominant route. Paracellular transmigration is mediated by integrins, junction adhesion molecules, and the adhesion molecules platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 (PECAM-1), CD99, and the endothelial cell-selective adhesion molecule (ESAM) [33,34].

The contribution of chemokines, particularly CXCR2 ligands, to the transmigration of neutrophils is not limited to the direct activation of neutrophils on the endothelial cell surface. Thus, in a model of acute lung injury, activation of CXCR2 was not only required on neutrophils, but also on endothelial cells [35]. This finding extends the complexity of the role of chemokines in mediating transmigration of neutrophils. For further details about the mechanisms of neutrophil transmigration other reviews are suggested [29,30].

Having traversed the endothelial cell layer, neutrophils must penetrate the perivascular basement membrane. The detailed mechanism of the penetration of the basement membrane is still elusive. Homophilic interactions of PECAM-1, however, appear to be crucial, as well as PECAM-1-dependent a b 6 1 integrin upregulation on transmigrated neutrophils, enabling the interaction of neutrophils with laminin in the basement membrane [36]. Proteases, expressed on the cell surface of neutrophils, might facilitate the penetration of the basement membrane. Neutrophils are capable of expressing a number of different proteases, but the importance of neutrophilderived proteases for transmigration is contentious. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 has been reported to be essential for the activity of Mac-1 in transendothelial migration of neutrophils in vitro [37]. Neutrophil proteases might also subtly alter the basement membrane or the subendothelial extracellular matrix (ECM) and thus facilitate the recruitment of subsequent neutrophils [37 -39].

Intriguingly, the structural composition of the vascular basement membrane differs in specific anatomical sites. Particularly in the early phases of inflammatory reactions, these differences can affect the ability of neutrophils to enter the inflammatory site. For example, a decreased density of the components collagen IV, laminin-10, and nidogen-2 facilitates the transmigration of neutrophils and favors transmigration [38]. Transmigration might also alter the phenotype of neutrophils and prime them for their functions in peripheral tissues. As a result, transmigrated neutrophils exhibit differences in their general protein and surface receptor expression [40 -42].

## Decision point III: finding the cue into the inflammatory site

It has recently been shown that diverse chemoattractants can act in a sequential cascade to recruit neutrophils into an inflammatory site. In this case, immune-complex-induced arthritis (K/BxN serum transfer-induced arthritis) is driven by a lipid -cytokine -chemokine cascade, precisely by leukotriene (LT)B4 -IL-1 b -CC chemokine receptor (CCR)1/CXCR2 ligands [13]. LTB4 and its high-affinity receptor BLT1 are absolutely required for the induction of immune-complex-induced arthritis. In this model, release of LTB4 by neutrophils, and expression of BLT1 specifically on neutrophils is sufficient to induce arthritis [43,44]. Adoptive transfer of wild-type neutrophils into BLT1-deficient ( Ltb4r1 /C0 / /C0 ) mice restores arthritis in these mice. Interestingly, analysis of the synovial infiltrate has shown that a few days after adoptive transfer, the bulk of neutrophils in the synovial fluid were Ltb4r1 /C0 / /C0 , suggesting BLT1 is only needed on a small proportion of all neutrophils for induction of arthritis, and that Ltb4r1 +/+ neutrophils facilitate the entry of Ltb4r1 /C0 / /C0 neutrophils into the joint. Following up on these observations, it has been found that Ltb4r1 +/+ neutrophils are required to express IL-1 b for the induction of arthritis. IL-1 b induces the release of CCR1 and CXCR2 ligands. Although both CCR1 and CXCR2 ligands recruit neutrophils into the joint, they do so non-redundantly because of differences in the timing of their expression and their cellular source. CCR1 ligands are primarily synthesized in the earlier phase of arthritis by synovial tissue, whereas CXCR2 ligands are required for the later phase and are released by the neutrophils themselves. The molecular basis for the sequential expression of CCR1 and CXCR2 ligands during induction of arthritis is not completely understood. The sequential cascade must be run through entirely (Figure 2), and inhibiting any point in the cascade attenuates the development of full-blown arthritis. Of note, the cascade described thus far is probably incomplete. The complement receptor C5aR, another important neutrophil chemoattractant receptor, is also required for arthritis development in this model, and it remains unknown if it is also required for neutrophil recruitment, and if so, where it fits into the cascade of other neutrophil chemoattractants. Furthermore, it is unclear which chemoattractant recruits the very first neutrophils into the joint. Adding further complexity, macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), a cytokine capable of recruiting neutrophils by binding to and activating CXCR2 as a non-cognate ligand [45,46], has recently been implicated in neutrophil recruitment in immune-complex-induced arthritis, with arthritis almost completely abrogated in Mif /C0 / /C0 mice [47]. The protective effect of MIF deficiency is more pronounced than that of CXCR2 deficiency, suggesting that MIF might contribute to the pathogenesis of arthritis in this model by mechanisms other than CXCR2 activation.

LTB4 -BLT1isnotonlycrucialforneutrophilrecruitment in models of autoimmune diseases, but it is also important for the inflammatory processes in the aftermath of injuries. In experimental spinal cord injuries, for instance, BLT1 on neutrophilsis required for their recruitment into spinal cord tissue[48]. Absence of BLT1orits inhibition ameliorates the

Figure 2 . Recruitment of neutrophils into the joint in immune complex-induced arthritis is mediated by a temporal cascade of chemoattractants. (a) At early time points, LTB4 is required to recruit and activate a small number of neutrophils. (b) These recruited neutrophils release IL-1 b in the joint, which induces the release of predominantly CCR1 ligands at first and later CXCR2 ligands from cells in the joint. (c) CCR1 ligands are required to recruit the next wave of neutrophils into the joint, and this recruitment of neutrophils is broadly amplified in the last step of the cascade when (d) CXCR2 ligands released form neutrophils themselves potently recruit large numbers of neutrophils into the joint.

<!-- image -->

inflammatory process. Neutrophils that have infiltrated the spinal cord tissue have elevated levels of IL-6, IL-1 b , TNF, KC, MIP-2, and MCP-1 compared to blood neutrophils, suggesting that they amplify inflammation and the recruitment of more neutrophils. Together, these findings imply a sequence of events similar to those described in immunecomplex-induced arthritis.

Lipid mediators such as LTB4 are rapidly produced and have a short half-life, thus, it is not surprising that they frequently act at the beginning of neutrophil recruitment cascades and at the local site of inflammation. By contrast, chemokines are well poised to act later in cascades and at longer distances. The production of chemokines is slower than that of lipid chemoattractants. Chemokines are often transcriptionally regulated and their release is often also subject to post-transcriptional regulation. However, the ability of chemokines to bind glycosaminoglycans, which increases their retention in the tissue and protects them from proteolysis, probably prolonging their half-life [32,49,50], enables chemokines to act later in chemoattractant cascades and at farther distances than lipid mediators [51 -53].

In bovine serum albumin (BSA) antigen-induced arthritis, another complex cascade of chemoattractants has been identified that orchestrates neutrophil recruitment. In this model, neutrophil entry into the joint is initiated by IL-23, which then induces IL-17A production within the joint.

This induces TNF, KC and LIX, which subsequently induce the release of LTB4 and further recruitment of neutrophils into the joint [54,55]. IL-23 regulates this cascade through a positive feedback loop, which begins with IL-23 inducing cyclooxygenase-2-dependent production of prostaglandin E2, which then reinforces the release of IL-23 [56]. Accordingly, neutralization of IL-23 inhibits the recruitment of neutrophils into the joint after intra-articular injection of BSA in immunized mice, whereas intra-articular injection of recombinant IL-23 alone induces the recruitment of neutrophils to the joint. The cellular sources of these mediators in this complex cascade have not been identified.

A spatial cascade of chemoattractants has also recently been described in mouse models of focal liver and skin necrosis [14]. Here, it has been found that multiple distinct zones of chemoattractants exist around foci of necrosis (Figure 3). The cascade starts with the release of DAMPs and ATP by necrotic cells. This induces the release of IL1 b , which in turn generates an inflammatory microenvironment around the area of necrosis. This is caused in part by the increased expression of adhesion molecules on endothelial cells, thereby promoting neutrophil adherence to the vascular wall. Although neutrophil adherence to the endothelium is usually mainly mediated by LFA-1 -ICAM1 interactions, in this particular model, neutrophil adhesion is primarily mediated by Mac1 -ICAM-1 interactions. In addition, an intravascular gradient of the CXCR2

Figure 3 . Recruitment of neutrophils into a sterile necrotic site is mediated by a spatial cascade of chemoattractants. (a) Necrotic tissues release DAMPs and ATP, which induce the release of IL-1 b from resident tissue macrophages. (b) Secreted IL-1 b induces the intravascular expression of ICAM-1, resulting in the adhesion of neutrophils to the endothelium surrounding the necrotic focus. Zones of chemoattractants are formed at different distances from the necrotic focus that sequential guide neutrophil migration into the lesion. (c) Farthest from the necrotic focus, a gradient of CXCR2 ligands is induced in the vasculature that guides neutrophils to the vicinity of the necrotic focus. (d) This chemokine gradient falls off close to the necrotic site, and neutrophils are then guided into the necrotic site by a gradient of FPRL1 ligands released from dying cells.

<!-- image -->

ligands MIP-2 and KC towards the necrotic site is formed and guides neutrophils to the lesion. This gradient abruptly ends in a zone approximately 150 m maround the lesion. From this point, the recruitment of neutrophils becomes independent of CXCR2 and dependent on formyl peptide receptor (FPR)1 activated by endogenous formyl-peptide signals released from necrotic cells. FPR1 signaling precisely directs neutrophils into the site of necrosis. This exemplifies the coordinated recruitment of neutrophils by a spatial cascade. In spatial cascades such as this, neutrophils must prioritize between diverse chemotactic signals. Neutrophils are able to distinguish between 'endtarget' (e.g. C5a, C3a, and N-formly-peptides) and 'intermediate target' (e.g. chemokines and LTB4) chemoattractants [57]. At the molecular level, the activity of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways is pivotal for the prioritization between opposing signals from end-target and intermediate-target chemoattractants [28]. Thus, endtarget chemoattractants, such as N-formly-peptides, activate both p38 MAPK and PI3K, whereas intermediate chemoattractants, such as MIP-2, only activate PI3K [57 -60]. Accordingly, in neutrophil recruitment to sites of focal necrosis, the MIP-2 signal is hierarchically overridden by formyl-peptide signals as neutrophils leave the zone of maximal CXCL2 concentration to enter the zone dominated by FPR1 signals [14].

Spatially and temporally restricted expression of chemokines might also result in non-redundancy between chemokines that activate the same receptor. Five ELR + CXC chemokines bind to murine CXCR2 and have similar effects in vitro . In vivo , however, these ligands might exert distinct roles. Thus, intratracheal instillation of TNF alone, or in combination with IL-17A, induces the CXCR2

ligands KC, MIP-2 and LIX (CXCL5). Although the expression of KC and MIP-2 peak at 4 h, only LIX expression remains high for at least 24 h [61]. Evaluation of the neutrophil recruitment into the lung shows that, although LIXdoes not play a significant role at early time points, it is indispensable for sustaining neutrophil infiltration. In vitro, alveolar type II cells have been identified as a major source for LIX after stimulation with TNF and IL-17A. They release LIX in a polarized fashion on the basolateral or the apical membrane, dependent on the direction of stimulation. This suggests that alveolar type II cells might also establish a locally directed chemokine gradient in vivo .

LIX also plays a role in other inflammatory models. In a model of chronic peritonitis induced by injection of 2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecane (pristane), inhibition of LIX lowers the influx of neutrophils into the peritoneum. Although MIP-2 is strongly induced by pristane in this model, its neutralization had no effect on neutrophil recruitment [62]. LIX and MIP-2 are both thought to bind exclusively to CXCR2, and therefore, they are believed to play redundant roles if both chemokines are strongly expressed at the same time and place. This finding, however, suggests that, in vivo , each might fulfill a unique role.

## Self-perpetuation through neutrophils recruiting neutrophils

Neutrophils have been regarded as purely phagocytotic effector cells, lacking the noteworthy capability to synthesize proteins once they are terminally differentiated. However, it has become evident that neutrophils in peripheral tissues are more active transcriptionally and translationally than their counterparts in the blood, and that they contribute to the orchestration of inflammatory reactions by releasing chemokines, cytokines and lipid mediators

[29,63,64]. Although the quantity of protein that a single neutrophil can synthesize is usually surpassed by other immune cells such as macrophages, neutrophils can nevertheless contribute to overall biological mediator production as a result of their sheer number [13,65 -68].

Manymediators released by neutrophils themselves are neutrophil chemoattractants. Therefore, neutrophils might recruit other neutrophils. In immune-complexinduced arthritis, the recruitment of neutrophils by neutrophils into the joint is apparently crucial for the development of arthritis. Here, neutrophils in the joint release LTB4, MIP-1 a (CCL3), MIP-2, and IL-1 b [13]. Although the first three most probably recruit neutrophils into the joint directly, the latter induces the release of neutrophil-chemoattractant mediators from other cell types in the joint (Figure 2). Thus, in response to IL-1 b , fibroblast-like synoviocytes produce KC and LIX, endothelial cells produce KC, and macrophages produce MIP-1 g (CCL9).

Moreover, neutrophils might also alter the activity of neutrophil chemoattractants through the activity of their proteases. In some instances, proteases might inactivate chemokines and cytokines, whereas in other instances, proteases might activate chemokines or convert a chemokine agonist into an antagonist [66,69]. Proteolysis by the protease MMP-2, for instance, enhances the potency of LIX, whereas MMP-2 deactivates SDF-1 and converts CX3CL1 and CCL7 into antagonists. By cleaving ECM components, proteases can also generate newly derived peptides with neutrophil-attractant activity [70] . MMP-8, MMP9, and prolyl endopeptidase, for instance, in concert cleave collagen to proline -glycine -proline (PGP), a peptide activating CXCR1 and CXCR2 on neutrophils [71]. PGP might particularly contribute to neutrophil recruitment when chemokine levels are already declining. Surprisingly, PGP is apparently degraded by LTA4 hydrolase, an enzyme required for the generation of LTB4 [72]. This enzyme, therefore, exerts opposing effects on the recruitment of neutrophils. As the net effect on neutrophil recruitment is likely to depend on the stage of the inflammatory process, it is conceivable that this behavior expresses the specialization of the enzyme to regulate acute neutrophilic inflammatory processes with a fast recruitment of neutrophils and then its quick termination.

Intriguingly, neutrophils not only promote the recruitmentof other neutrophils to the inflammatory site, but also choreograph the natural progression of an acute inflammatory reaction from a predominantly neutrophilic infiltrate to a monocytic one, as reviewed elsewhere [73], and finally, they also contribute to the resolution of inflammation as reviewed elsewhere [74,75].

## Conclusions and future directions

In recent years, temporal and spatial cascades of chemically diverse chemoattractants have been identified that coordinate the recruitment of neutrophils in mouse models of acute local inflammation. These findings suggest chemoattractants have unique roles in vivo . Temporal and spatial cascades of chemoattractants appear to be necessary to guide the complex migratory path of neutrophils

from the bone marrow into the blood, from the blood into the tissue, and then once in the tissue, guide neutrophils to the exact location of the inflammatory focus. The involvement of multiple chemoattractants, acting at different points in the migratory path, provides a mechanism to control tightly and precisely the recruitment of neutrophils into tissues. These cascades also provide multiple points for intervening therapeutically to attenuate neutrophil recruitment into tissues. If a specific chemoattractant or receptor is not available at the appropriate time and place, the cascade comes to a halt and the neutrophil inflammatory reaction collapses. Animal models suggest that the cascade is more vulnerable to inhibition in its early stages, because in later stages of inflammation, the recruitment of neutrophils becomes reinforced by multiple overlapping pathways. Therefore, future research must aim to define chemoattractant cascades that drive specific inflammatory reactions, and seek to identify the early acting mediators that initiate the process. We believe that targeting these early points in specific chemoattractant pathways will lead to new effective therapies.

## Acknowledgments

This work was supported by grants of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Sa1960/1-1 to C.D.S.) and of the National Institutes of Health (R01AI050892 to A.D.L. and K08-AR054094 to N.D.K.).

## References

- 1 Segal, A.W. (2005) How neutrophils kill microbes. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23, 197 -223
- 2 Aggarwal, N.R. et al. (2010) Moderate oxygen augments lipopolysaccharide-induced lung injury in mice. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 298, L371 L381 -
- 3 Edwards, S.W. and Hallett, M.B. (1997) Seeing the wood for the trees: the forgotten role of neutrophils in rheumatoid arthritis. Immunol. Today 18, 320 -324
- 4 Genovese, T. et al. (2008) TNF-alpha blockage in a mouse model of SCI: evidence for improved outcome. Shock 29, 32 -41
- 5 Monteseirin, J. (2009) Neutrophils and asthma. J. Investig. Allergol. Clin. Immunol. 19, 340 -354
- 6 Taoka, Y. et al. (1998) Activated protein C reduces the severity of compression-induced spinal cord injury in rats by inhibiting activation of leukocytes. J. Neurosci. 18, 1393 -1398
- 7 Eyles, J.L. et al. (2008) A key role for G-CSF-induced neutrophil production and trafficking during inflammatory arthritis. Blood 112, 5193 5201 -
- 8 Wipke, B.T. and Allen, P.M. (2001) Essential role of neutrophils in the initiation and progression of a murine model of rheumatoid arthritis. J. Immunol. 167, 1601 -1608
- 9 Nabe, T. et al. (2011) Important role of neutrophils in the late asthmatic response in mice. Life Sci. 88, 1127 -1135
- 10 Hogg, J.C. et al. (2004) The nature of small-airway obstruction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 350, 2645 -2653
- 11 Drost, E.M. et al. (2005) Oxidative stress and airway inflammation in severe exacerbations of COPD. Thorax 60, 293 -300
- 12 Papi, A. et al. (2006) Pathophysiology of exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc. 3, 245 -251
- 13 Chou, R.C. et al. (2010) Lipid -cytokine -chemokine cascade drives neutrophil recruitment in a murine model of inflammatory arthritis. Immunity 33, 266 -278
- 14 McDonald, B. et al. (2010) Intravascular danger signals guide neutrophils to sites of sterile inflammation. Science 330, 362 -366
- 15 Summers, C. et al. (2010) Neutrophil kinetics in health and disease. Trends Immunol. 31, 318 -324
- 16 Semerad, C.L. et al. (2002) G-CSF is an essential regulator of neutrophil trafficking from the bone marrow to the blood. Immunity 17, 413 -423

- 17 Rankin, S.M. (2010) The bone marrow: a site of neutrophil clearance. J. Leukoc. Biol. 88, 241 -251
- 18 Suratt, B.T. et al. (2004) Role of the CXCR4/SDF-1 chemokine axis in circulating neutrophil homeostasis. Blood 104, 565 -571
- 19 Wengner, A.M. et al. (2008) The coordinated action of G-CSF and ELR + CXC chemokines in neutrophil mobilization during acute inflammation. Blood 111, 42 -49
- 20 Eash, K.J. et al. (2010) CXCR2 and CXCR4 antagonistically regulate neutrophil trafficking from murine bone marrow. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 2423 2431 -
- 21 Petty, J.M. et al. (2009) Crosstalk between CXCR4/stromal derived factor-1 and VLA-4/VCAM-1 pathways regulates neutrophil retention in the bone marrow. J. Immunol. 182, 604 -612
- 22 Hernandez, P.A. et al. (2003) Mutations in the chemokine receptor gene CXCR4 are associated with WHIM syndrome, a combined immunodeficiency disease. Nat. Genet. 34, 70 -74
- 23 Gorlin, R.J. et al. (2000) WHIM syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder: clinical, hematological, and molecular studies. Am. J. Med. Genet. 91, 368 -376
- 24 Kawai, T. et al. (2007) WHIM syndrome myelokathexis reproduced in the NOD/SCID mouse xenotransplant model engrafted with healthy human stem cells transduced with C-terminus-truncated CXCR4. Blood 109, 78 -84
- 25 Balabanian, K. et al. (2005) WHIM syndromes with different genetic anomalies are accounted for by impaired CXCR4 desensitization to CXCL12. Blood 105, 2449 -2457
- 26 Arancibia, S.A. et al. (2007) Toll-like receptors are key participants in innate immune responses. Biol. Res. 40, 97 -112
- 27 Zeytun, A. et al. (2010) Induction of cytokines and chemokines by Tolllike receptor signaling: strategies for control of inflammation. Crit Rev. Immunol. 30, 53 -67
- 28 Williams, M. et al . (2011) Emerging mechanisms of neutrophil recruitment across endothelium. Trends Immunol. , doi:10.1016/ j.it.2011.06.009 (in this issue).
- 29 Borregaard, N. (2010) Neutrophils, from marrow to microbes. Immunity 33, 657 -670
- 30 Ley, K. et al. (2007) Getting to the site of inflammation: the leukocyte adhesion cascade updated. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7, 678 -689
- 31 Phillipson, M. et al. (2006) Intraluminal crawling of neutrophils to emigration sites: a molecularly distinct process from adhesion in the recruitment cascade. J. Exp. Med. 203, 2569 -2575
- 32 Johnson, Z. et al. (2005) Interaction of chemokines and glycosaminoglycans: a new twist in the regulation of chemokine function with opportunities for therapeutic intervention. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 16, 625 -636
- 33 Lou, O. et al. (2007) CD99 is a key mediator of the transendothelial migration of neutrophils. J. Immunol. 178, 1136 -1143
- 34 Wegmann, F. et al. (2006) ESAM supports neutrophil extravasation, activation of Rho, and VEGF-induced vascular permeability. J. Exp. Med. 203, 1671 -1677
- 35 Reutershan, J. et al. (2006) Critical role of endothelial CXCR2 in LPSinduced neutrophil migration into the lung. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 695 -702
- 36 Dangerfield, J. et al. (2002) PECAM-1 (CD31) homophilic interaction up-regulates alpha6beta1 on transmigrated neutrophils in vivo and plays a functional role in the ability of alpha6 integrins to mediate leukocyte migration through the perivascular basement membrane. J. Exp. Med. 196, 1201 -1211
- 37 Stefanidakis, M. et al. (2004) Intracellular and cell surface localization of a complex between alphaMbeta2 integrin and promatrix metalloproteinase-9 progelatinase in neutrophils. J. Immunol. 172, 7060 7068 -
- 38 Wang, S. et al. (2006) Venular basement membranes contain specific matrix protein low expression regions that act as exit points for emigrating neutrophils. J. Exp. Med. 203, 1519 -1532
- 39 Young, R.E. et al. (2007) Role of neutrophil elastase in LTB4-induced neutrophil transmigration in vivo assessed with a specific inhibitor and neutrophil elastase deficient mice. Br. J. Pharmacol. 151, 628 -637
- 40 Coldren, C.D. et al. (2006) Functional and genomic changes induced by alveolar transmigration in human neutrophils. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 291, L1267 L1276 -
- 41 Nourshargh, S. and Marelli-Berg, F.M. (2005) Transmigration through venular walls: a key regulator of leukocyte phenotype and function. Trends Immunol. 26, 157 -165

- 42 Hu, M. et al. (2004) Transmigration across a lung epithelial monolayer delays apoptosis of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Surgery 135, 87 -98
- 43 Chen, M. et al. (2006) Neutrophil-derived leukotriene B4 is required for inflammatory arthritis. J. Exp. Med. 203, 837 -842
- 44 Kim, N.D. et al. (2006) A unique requirement for the leukotriene B4 receptor BLT1 for neutrophil recruitment in inflammatory arthritis. J. Exp. Med. 203, 829 -835
- 45 Bernhagen, J. et al. (2007) MIF is a noncognate ligand of CXC chemokine receptors in inflammatory and atherogenic cell recruitment. Nat. Med. 13, 587 -596
- 46 Weber, C. et al. (2008) Structural determinants of MIF functions in CXCR2-mediated inflammatory and atherogenic leukocyte recruitment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 16278 -16283
- 47 Santos, L.L. et al. (2010) Macrophage migration inhibitory factor regulates neutrophil chemotactic responses in inflammatory arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 63, 960 -970
- 48 Saiwai, H. et al. (2010) The LTB4 BLT1 axis mediates neutrophil -infiltration and secondary injury in experimental spinal cord injury. Am. J. Pathol. 176, 2352 -2366
- 49 Cadene, M. et al. (1995) Influence of low molecular mass heparin on the kinetics of neutrophil elastase inhibition by mucus proteinase inhibitor. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 13204 -13209
- 50 Webb, L.M. et al. (1993) Binding to heparan sulfate or heparin enhances neutrophil responses to interleukin 8. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 90, 7158 -7162
- 51 Quinton, L.J. et al. (2004) Selective transport of cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant from the lung to the blood facilitates pulmonary neutrophil recruitment. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 286, L465 L472 -
- 52 Zhang, P. et al. (2005) The granulopoietic cytokine response and enhancement of granulopoiesis in mice during endotoxemia. Shock 23, 344 -352
- 53 Serbina, N.V. and Pamer, E.G. (2006) Monocyte emigration from bone marrow during bacterial infection requires signals mediated by chemokine receptor CCR2. Nat. Immunol. 7, 311 -317
- 54 Grespan, R. et al. (2008) CXCR2-specific chemokines mediate leukotriene B4-dependent recruitment of neutrophils to inflamed joints in mice with antigen-induced arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 58, 2030 2040 -
- 55 Lemos, H.P. et al. (2009) Prostaglandin mediates IL-23/IL-17-induced neutrophil migration in inflammation by inhibiting IL-12 and IFNgamma production. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 5954 -5959
- 56 Pelletier, M. et al. (2010) Evidence for a cross-talk between human neutrophils and Th17 cells. Blood 115, 335 -343
- 57 Foxman, E.F. et al. (1997) Multistep navigation and the combinatorial control of leukocyte chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 139, 1349 -1360
- 58 Foxman, E.F. et al. (1999) Integrating conflicting chemotactic signals. The role of memory in leukocyte navigation. J. Cell Biol. 147, 577 -588
- 59 Heit, B. et al. (2008) PTEN functions to 'prioritize' chemotactic cues and prevent 'distraction' in migrating neutrophils. Nat. Immunol. 9, 743 -752
- 60 Khan, A.I. et al. (2005) Lipopolysaccharide: a p38 MAPK-dependent disrupter of neutrophil chemotaxis. Microcirculation 12, 421 -432
- 61 Liu, Y. et al. (2011) IL-17A and TNF-{alpha} exert synergistic effects on expression of CXCL5 by alveolar type II cells in vivo and in vitro . J. Immunol. 186, 3197 -3205
- 62 Lee, P.Y. et al. (2011) IL-1alpha modulates neutrophil recruitment in chronic inflammation induced by hydrocarbon oil. J. Immunol. 186, 1747 1754 -
- 63 Scapini, P. et al. (2000) The neutrophil as a cellular source of chemokines. Immunol. Rev. 177, 195 -203
- 64 Lindemann, S.W. et al. (2004) Neutrophils alter the inflammatory milieu by signal-dependent translation of constitutive messenger RNAs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 7076 -7081
- 65 Guma, M. et al. (2009) Caspase 1-independent activation of interleukin-1beta in neutrophil-predominant inflammation. Arthritis Rheum. 60, 3642 -3650
- 66 Joosten, L.A. et al. (2009) Inflammatory arthritis in caspase 1 genedeficient mice: contribution of proteinase 3 to caspase 1-independent production of bioactive interleukin-1beta. Arthritis Rheum. 60, 3651 -3662
- 67 Kasama, T. et al. (2005) Neutrophil-derived cytokines: potential therapeutic targets in inflammation. Curr. Drug Targets Inflamm. Allergy 4, 273 -279

- 68 Cassatella, M.A. (1999) Neutrophil-derived proteins: selling cytokines by the pound. Adv. Immunol. 73, 369 -509
- 69 Van, L.P. and Libert, C. (2007) Chemokine and cytokine processing by matrix metalloproteinases and its effect on leukocyte migration and inflammation. J. Leukoc. Biol. 82, 1375 -1381
- 70 Weathington, N.M. et al. (2006) A novel peptide CXCR ligand derived from extracellular matrix degradation during airway inflammation. Nat. Med. 12, 317 -323
- 71 Gaggar, A. et al. (2008) A novel proteolytic cascade generates an extracellular matrix-derived chemoattractant in chronic neutrophilic inflammation. J. Immunol. 180, 5662 -5669

- 72 Snelgrove, R.J. et al. (2010) A critical role for LTA4H in limiting chronic pulmonary neutrophilic inflammation. Science 330, 90 -94
- 73 Soehnlein, O. et al. (2009) Mechanisms underlying neutrophilmediated monocyte recruitment. Blood 114, 4613 -4623
- 74 Ariel, A. et al. (2006) Apoptotic neutrophils and T cells sequester chemokines during immune response resolution through modulation of CCR5 expression. Nat. Immunol. 7, 1209 -1216
- 75 Ariel, A. and Serhan, C.N. (2007) Resolvins and protectins in the termination program of acute inflammation. Trends Immunol. 28, 176 183 -
- 76 Zlotnik, A. et al. (2006) The chemokine and chemokine receptor superfamilies and their molecular evolution. Genome Biol. 7, 243