1234567890();,:

<!-- image -->

## REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN Neutrophils in chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases

2

Andrea Herrero-Cervera 1 ✉ , Oliver Soehnlein 1,2 and Ellinor Kenne

© The Author(s) 2022

Chronic in /uniFB02 ammation is a component of many disease conditions that affect a large group of individuals worldwide. Chronic in /uniFB02 ammation is characterized by persistent, low-grade in /uniFB02 ammation and is increased in the aging population. Neutrophils are normally the /uniFB01 rst responders to acute in /uniFB02 ammation and contribute to the resolution of in /uniFB02 ammation. However, in chronic in /uniFB02 ammation, the role of neutrophils is less well understood and has been described as either bene /uniFB01 cial or detrimental, causing tissue damage and enhancing the immune response. Emerging evidence suggests that neutrophils are important players in several chronic diseases, such as atherosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and autoimmune disorders. This review will highlight the interaction of neutrophils with other cells in the context of chronic in /uniFB02 ammation, the contribution of neutrophils to selected chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases, and possible future therapeutic strategies.

Keywords: Chronic; In /uniFB02 ammation; Disease; Neutrophil; Neutrophil extracellular traps

Cellular &amp; Molecular Immunology (2022) 19:177-191; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41423-021-00832-3

## INTRODUCTION

The acute in /uniFB02 ammatory process is a vital response to injury and infection that protects the organism against invading pathogens and repairs tissue damaged by trauma. Acute in /uniFB02 ammation is selflimiting with a resolution phase that terminates the in /uniFB02 ammatory response and initiates the reparative process [1, 2]. Chronic in /uniFB02 ammation occurs if the initiating stimulus is not removed or if the resolution program is disturbed, resulting in a state of lowgrade in /uniFB02 ammation. Chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases, including atherosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and autoimmune disorders, are major causes of death worldwide [3]. Systemic chronic in /uniFB02 ammation increases with age [4], is low-grade and persistent, and the causes include chronic infections, lifestyle and environmental factors, physical inactivity, microbiome dysbiosis, diet, psychological stress, and toxins [5].

Neutrophils, which are the most abundant white blood cells in humans, have been well established as /uniFB01 rst responders to acute in /uniFB02 ammation. Under normal conditions, neutrophils contribute to resolution and tissue repair by phagocytosing necrotic cells to stop them from attracting more immune cells, releasing mediators to promote growth and angiogenesis, and producing resolvins and protectins [6]. Over the past decades, neutrophils have also been shown to play a signi /uniFB01 cant role in chronic in /uniFB02 ammation. Neutrophils are continuously recruited to the site of chronic in /uniFB02 ammation and contribute to driving the process through the release of serine proteases and the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), as well as the activation of other immune cells. Here, we will review neutrophil crosstalk with other cells in the context of chronic in /uniFB02 ammation and the contribution of neutrophils to selected chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases and summarize potential strategies to interfere with the damaging effects of neutrophils in chronic diseases.

## NEUTROPHIL NETWORKS Neutrophil-platelet interactions

Chronic in /uniFB02 ammation is characterized by a prothrombotic state caused by the mutual activation of neutrophils and platelets (Fig. 1). Neutrophil-platelet complexes are found in humans with chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases such as in /uniFB02 ammatory bowel disease (IBD) [7], psoriasis [8], ulcerative colitis (UC) [9], and atherosclerosis [10]. The interaction with platelets triggers several key neutrophil processes, including adhesion to the endothelium [11] and the formation of NETs [12]. Moreover, platelet numbers are increased in type 2 diabetic mellitus (T2DM) patients by neutrophil S100A8/A9 secretion. S100A8/A9 binding to the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) expressed on liver-resident Kupffer cells increases thrombopoietin production, which in turn triggers megakaryocyte proliferation and platelet production [13].

After endothelial activation by stimuli such as injuries or pathogen recognition, platelet-neutrophil complexes are formed by the binding of platelet P-selectin with P-selectin granulocyte ligand (PSGL)-1 on neutrophils. This interaction promotes further interactions between intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-2 and CD40 ligand (CD40L) on platelets and integrin α β L 2 and CD40 on neutrophils, which enables the /uniFB01 rm formation of plateletneutrophil complexes [14 -16]. In mouse models of psoriasis, blocking neutrophil-platelet interactions by infusion of an antiPSGL-1 antibody reduces ear thickness in imiquimod-induced psoriasis [8]. In atherosclerotic patients, neutrophil-platelet complexes stimulate the secretion of S100A8 from neutrophils, which binds to Toll-like receptor (TLR)4 and promotes an in /uniFB02 ammatory response, resulting in elevated levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α and interleukin (IL)1 β and the migration and adhesion of neutrophils [10].

1 Institute for Experimental Pathology, Center for Molecular Biology of In /uniFB02 ammation, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Germany. 2 Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. ✉ email: herreroc@uni-muenster.de

Received: 27 June 2021 Accepted: 13 December 2021 Published online: 17 January 2022

<!-- image -->

Fig. 1 Neutrophil crosstalk with cells in the circulation. Neutrophil interactions with platelets occur by direct adhesion through PSGL-1, integrin α β L 2 , and CD40 on neutrophils and P-selectin, ICAM-2 and CD40L on platelets. S100A8/A9 secreted by neutrophils promotes megakaryocyte proliferation and platelet production. Platelet secretion by PEVs containing chemokines and the release of chemokines from platelet granules activate neutrophils and promote NET formation. Conversely, NET proteins activate the coagulation cascade. Neutrophils promote B cell survival and differentiation to plasma cells through the secretion of BAFF, which binds to BCMA on B cells. Neutrophils can act as APCs to promote T cell differentiation in effector T cells through MHC molecules or inhibit T cell proliferation. Monocytes can extend the neutrophil lifespan and promote neutrophil recruitment through the secretion of GM-CSF and G-CSF. Monocyte recruitment is mediated by granule proteins released from neutrophils. Lactoferrin, azurocidin, S100A9, HPN1 -3, LL-37 and NETs induce M1 macrophage polarization, while NETs, LL-37 and Anx1 induce M2 polarization. Anx1 annexin 1, APCs antigen presenting cells, BAFF B cell activating factor; BCMA, B cell maturation antigen, CD40L CD40 ligand, HNP1 3 human neutrophil -peptides 1 3, -ICAM intercellular adhesion molecule, MHC major histocompatibility complex, NET neutrophil extracellular trap, PEVs platelet extracellular vesicles, PSGL-1 P-selectin granulocyte ligand 1

<!-- image -->

In addition to promoting neutrophil adhesion to the endothelium, crosstalk between platelets and neutrophils leads to NET formation. C-X-C motif chemokine ligand (CXCL)4 released by platelets from patients with anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis promotes NET formation [17]. Platelets can bind bacteria on the surface, forming a platelet-bacteria bundle. This structure has been shown to serve as a platform for neutrophil adhesion and NET release in a mouse model of sepsis [18]. Cathelicidin (LL-37/CRAMP), which is released from neutrophils, promotes platelet-leukocyte aggregation and neutrophil recruitment through the induction of platelet activation in thrombi in mice [19]. Inhibiting platelet aggregation with antiplatelet therapy reduces the release of neutrophil-activating substances from α -granules in atherothrombosis [15]. Platelet extracellular vesicles (PEVs) contain CXCL5, which can be transferred to the endothelium and thereby promote neutrophil adhesion, and the PEV surface is composed of different adhesive glycoproteins, such as β 1-integrin and P-selectin [20]. PEVs isolated from patients with systemic sclerosis release higher levels of high mobility group box (HMGB) and promote neutrophil activation and NET formation in vitro [21]. A role for NETs in a procoagulant phenotype has been established in IBD, and IBD-derived human NETs increase the risk for thrombosis by enhancing platelet microparticle release through TLR2 and TLR4 in vitro [7].

Platelet-endothelial cell (EC) interactions are crucial for myeloid cell recruitment. Moreover, the interaction between platelets and neutrophils promotes the activation and transmigration of neutrophils to sites of injury, as well as NET formation. Conversely, platelet-neutrophil complexes enhance platelet activation and thrombus formation.

## Neutrophil interactions with adaptative immune cells

Neutrophils interact with B cells by contact-independent signals such as the secretion of B cell activating factor (BAFF). BAFF is involved in the survival, maturation, and differentiation of B cells, is expressed on the neutrophil surface and within intracellular stores and is upregulated in chronic diseases [22] (Fig. 1). Cigarette smoke (CS) is the primary cause of chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD) [23], and neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration in the lungs of wild-type (WT) mice exposed to CS correlates positively with BAFF expression. In vitro, BAFF secretion was increased in neutrophils treated with cigarette smoke extract. Accordingly, the depletion of neutrophils reduces BAFF expression in the lung, and mice that are de /uniFB01 cient in BAFF have decreased neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration in the lung [24]. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by the presence of rheumatoid factors and anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs) in human serum [25]. Human ACPA-positive B cells stimulated with citrullinated proteins induce neutrophil migration in vitro by secreting CXCL8, a neutrophil chemotactic factor [26], indicating a role for B cell-neutrophil interactions in RA. In addition, LL-37-DNA complexes derived from systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients speci /uniFB01 cally induce the production of anti-LL-37 antibodies. Hence, autoantibodies against LL-37 and immune complexes of DNA or RNA and autoantibodies can be detected in individuals with this chronic disease [27].

In addition to neutrophil interactions with B cells, myeloidderived suppressor cells (MDSCs), which are a neutrophil population (see neutrophil heterogeneity in chronic in /uniFB02 ammation), can regulate T cells in chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory conditions. Thus, skin from psoriatic patients accumulates more MDSCs than skin from healthy donors. Under this chronic condition, MDSCs expand and increase CD4 + T cell differentiation to T helper (Th)17 T cells.

Therefore, imiquimod-induced psoriatic mice treated with gemcitabine, an inhibitor of MDSCs that is a nucleoside analog and a chemotherapeutic agent, exhibit reduced MDSC accumulation and in /uniFB01 ltration of Th17 and T regulatory cells in the spleen, thus reducing in /uniFB02 ammation and disease severity [28]. Furthermore, neutrophils can acquire antigen-presenting cell (APC) properties [29, 30]. In RA, NET peptides are internalized by synovial /uniFB02 uid /uniFB01 broblasts, loaded in major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II molecules, and presented to T cells. This process promotes T and B cell responses, augmenting the in /uniFB02 ammatory response [31].

In summary, the secretion of BAFF from neutrophils promotes B cell survival and proliferation, plasma cell differentiation and antibody production. In chronic diseases such as COPD, SLE or RA, these effects are enhanced, exacerbating the disease through an autoreactive B cell response and autoantibody overproduction. Moreover, neutrophils and MDSCs can inhibit T cell proliferation or promote CD4 + T cell differentiation depending on the disease context (Fig. 1).

## Neutrophil-monocyte/macrophage interplay

Tissue-resident macrophages can be activated and recruit neutrophils to the in /uniFB02 ammatory site by secreting chemoattractants such as CXCL1, CXCL2, IL1 α and C-C motif chemokine ligand (CCL)2 and increase the neutrophil lifespan by secreting granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and TNF α [32]. Once at the site of in /uniFB02 ammation, neutrophils increase the in /uniFB02 ammatory response by recruiting monocytes via the release of LL-37, azurocidin, cathepsin G (CTSG), human neutrophil peptides 1 -3 (HNP1 3) and proteinase 3 (PR3) [33, 34]. Neutro--phils have been shown to shape monocyte differentiation and macrophage polarization. During infection, azurocidin and lactoferrin released by neutrophils induce the polarization of macrophages to a proin /uniFB02 ammatory M1 phenotype. Lactoferrin is taken up by macrophages from apoptotic neutrophils and enhances the microbicidal activity of macrophages [35]. In addition, the neutrophil granule proteins azurocidin and HNP1 3 induce M1 -macrophages, which are characterized by TNF α and interferon (INF) γ release and enhanced phagocytosis [36]. The alarmin S100A9 induces the secretion of proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) by synovial macrophages in osteoarthritis [37]. In atherosclerosis, cholesterol crystals induce NET formation, which in turn primes macrophages to produce and release cytokines that activate Th17 cells, resulting in the ampli /uniFB01 cation of in /uniFB02 ammation [38]. Moreover, coculturing M2 macrophages and NETs increases the secretion of proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines by M2 macrophages [39]. In addition, LL-37 can induce an anti-in /uniFB02 ammatory and resolution response in acute infections, reducing proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokine secretion without compromising phagocytosis or bacterial clearance [40 -42]. In contrast, in chronic in /uniFB02 ammation, LL-37 activates macrophages and increases proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokine release, thus inducing M1 macrophage polarization [43]. M2 macrophage polarization can also be facilitated by neutrophil microvesicles (MVs) and is partially mediated by annexin A1 and phosphatidylserine expression on MVs in vitro [44]. The switch from a proin /uniFB02 ammatory phenotype to a resolution phenotype enables tissue repair, and disruptions in this switch could lead to chronic in /uniFB02 ammation. In the context of infection, dying neutrophils are cleared by macrophages through a process called efferocytosis. This process is dependent on the release of annexin A1 from neutrophils [45], activation of NADPH oxidase by the TLR2/4-MyD88 signaling pathway [46], and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) [45]. In vitro experiments using human macrophages differentiated with GM-CSF showed M2 macrophage differentiation after treatment with apoptotic neutrophils [47]. However, apoptotic neutrophils induce this switch, and in vitro experiments with human blood neutrophils and monocyte-derived

macrophages revealed that viable neutrophils can reduce proin/uniFB02 ammatory cytokine release and the nuclear factor kappa B (NFκ B) signaling pathway in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced macrophages [48]. Moreover, in a mouse model of myocardial infarction, annexin 1 enhanced vascular endothelial growth factor-A release from macrophages and thus promoted their polarization to a reparative phenotype [49].

In summary, neutrophils contribute to monocyte recruitment, and tissue-resident macrophages favor neutrophil recruitment. Granule proteins and NETs can enhance the resolution phenotype in macrophages, which contributes to the resolution of in /uniFB02 ammation through neutrophil clearance via efferocytosis, pathogen phagocytosis and NET degradation within macrophages. However, neutrophil granule proteins and NETs can promote macrophage activation and proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokine secretion, exacerbating in /uniFB02 ammation (Fig. 1). However, monocyte/macrophage-neutrophil interactions in the context of chronic in /uniFB02 ammation need to be further investigated.

## NEUTROPHIL HETEROGENEITY IN CHRONIC INFLAMMATION

Recently, it has become clear that the neutrophil population is not homogenous and is now considered a heterogeneous population. Neutrophil heterogeneity includes phenotypic plasticity, which affects several immunoregulatory neutrophil functions. To study neutrophil heterogeneity, neutrophils can be isolated from peripheral blood by density gradient centrifugation. In healthy donors, normal-density neutrophils (NDNs) are found on top of erythrocytes after density gradient centrifugation. However, patients with acute or chronic in /uniFB02 ammation exhibit a heterogeneous population of mature and immature neutrophils in the mononuclear cell fraction. This population is known as low-density neutrophils (LDNs) [50]. The LDN population was /uniFB01 rst described in SLE and RA [51] and has now been well characterized in both diseases [52, 53]. The LDN population includes granulocytic/ polymorphonuclear-myeloid-derived suppressor cells (PMNMDSCs) with immunosuppressive properties and low-density granulocytes (LDGs), which are characterized as having proin/uniFB02 ammatory effects [54, 55]. The PMN-MDSC population has been extensively investigated in cancer patients in whom PMN-MDSCs are expanded compared to healthy subjects. The PMN-MDSC population suppresses T cell proliferation via the release of ROS and arginase 1. Another neutrophil subset found in cancer is tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs), which are neutrophils that have in /uniFB01 ltrated tumor tissue and that can exert pro- or antitumor effects [56]. In this review, we will focus on the subsets that have been studied in selected chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory disease conditions. For more information about neutrophil heterogeneity in cancer, we refer to other papers [57, 58].

Obese db/db mice, which are a model of T2DM, can be infected with S. aureus and have higher numbers of LDNs in the blood than control mice and noninfected obese db/db mice [59]. Although LDNs were /uniFB01 rst identi /uniFB01 ed under pathological conditions, LDNs have recently been identi /uniFB01 ed in the blood of healthy donors, representing up to 5% of the total mononuclear cell fraction [60] if artifacts are excluded. Classically, PMN-MDSCs have been described as immunoregulatory cells that suppress T cell proliferation in several diseases, such as cancer, by permitting tumor progression [55]. Suppression by PMN-MDSCs is accomplished by the induction of antigen-speci /uniFB01 c T cell tolerance, and ROS production is crucial [61]. Although MDSCs have been studied extensively in the /uniFB01 eld of cancer, recent data have demonstrated that PMN-MDSCs are expanded in patients with T2DM compared to healthy controls [62]. In vitro PMN-MDSCs derived from T2DM patients produce high levels of ROS compared to PMN-MDSCs derived from healthy donors in which ROS production is low. ROS production in patient-derived PMN-MDSCs is aggravated under hyperglycemic conditions [62]. MDSCs in BALF correlated with air /uniFB02 ow

180

limitation severity in COPD patients [63], accumulated in the human liver with NAFLD [64], and correlated positively with the clinical parameters alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and globulin [65]. Moreover, S. aureus infection in a diabetic mouse model causes an increase in LDN and NET production compared to infected nondiabetic mice [59]. However, more studies are needed to investigate the role of the speci /uniFB01 c subtypes PMNMDSCs and LDGs in other chronic diseases, such as NAFLD or IBD.

As neutrophil subset classi /uniFB01 cation is made according to buoyant density, it is important to consider that blood handling and isolation techniques can change NDNs to LDNs. This effect has been shown in healthy donors and can contribute to inaccurate conclusions among studies [54, 66]. Therefore, the development of markers and functional assays are necessary to distinguish between neutrophil populations, but to the best of our knowledge, no consensus has been reached [67]. One attempt to classify neutrophil subsets based on surface marker expression was recently published by Bongers et al. Neutrophils were classi /uniFB01 ed based on the surface expression of CD16 and CD62L. CD16 high CD62L high neutrophils are found in the circulation during homeostasis. During acute in /uniFB02 ammation induced by LPS administration, trauma or infection in humans, CD16 low CD62L low immature neutrophils are recruited to the circulation from the bone marrow. These cells have higher antibacterial activity than CD16 high CD62L high neutrophils, are hypersegmented and suppress T cell proliferation. CD16 low and CD62L low neutrophils increase during acute in /uniFB02 ammatory conditions in patients with trauma or infection or after LPS challenge, while chronic in /uniFB02 ammation (COPD and HIV) does not affect circulating levels of CD16 low and CD62L low neutrophils [68]. The dif /uniFB01 culty in de ning /uniFB01 neutrophil heterogeneity by gradient density and/or surface markers has led to the use of single-cell sequencing to characterize and de ne /uniFB01 different neutrophil subpopulations in steady-state conditions and during disease. Single-cell RNA sequencing of neutrophils isolated from bone marrow (BM), peripheral blood and the spleen revealed eight neutrophil populations that correspond to BM granulocyte-monocyte progenitor (GMP), proNeutrophil (Neu), preNeu, immature(imm)Neu and mature(m)Neu cells. In peripheral blood, three subsets of mature neutrophils were distinguished (PMNa, PMNb, PMNc) [69]. Recently, the term ' neutrotime ' has been established as a spectrum based on neutrophil maturation from the BM to the peripheral blood. Large transcriptional changes were de ned during /uniFB01 the transition from preNeu to immNeu in the BM and from mNeu in the BM to mature neutrophils from the blood [70]. During in /uniFB02 ammation, several mouse models of in /uniFB02 ammation, such as arthritis, pneumonitis, peritonitis [70] and after bacterial infection [69], the accumulation of immNeu cells occurred within in /uniFB02 amed tissues. Hence, analysis based on the transcriptome appears to be a more appropriate technique to cover the diversity of neutrophils that other methods.

Although neutrophil populations have been studied in homeostasis as well as several diseases, the data are limited with regard to the contribution of speci /uniFB01 c subsets in the chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases highlighted in this review. Future investigations should include the presence and function of different neutrophil populations in chronic diseases, and studies should take neutrophil heterogenicity into account when designing therapeutic strategies to target or enhance neutrophil functions.

## NEUTROPHILS IN CHRONIC INFLAMMATION Obesity-related diseases

T2DM is a risk factor for developing NAFLD, as it accelerates the progression of liver disease. Approximately 55% of patients with T2DM have NAFLD [71]. Moreover, T2DM and NAFLD have been linked to obesity, which is characterized by the abnormal accumulation of adipose tissue, leading to chronic low-grade in /uniFB02 ammation and an imbalance in the immune pro /uniFB01 le, including the activation of neutrophils [72].

Type 2 diabetes mellitus . In 2015, it was estimated that 1 in 11 adults globally (approximately 415 million people) aged 20 79 -years, had diabetes, and over 90% of diabetes mellitus cases were T2DM. T2DM is a chronic disease characterized by high levels of glucose in the blood, impaired insulin secretion and/or insulin resistance due to dysregulated carbohydrate, lipid and protein metabolism. Insulin resistance occurs many years before the onset of T2DM and is caused by obesity, physical inactivity and genetic predisposition [73]. Neutrophil activation, which is assessed as the expression of neutrophil elastase (NE) and myeloperoxidase (MPO) in peripheral blood leukocytes [74], NE serum levels [75], or MPO plasma levels [76], is enhanced in obese and T2DM patients compared to lean subjects. Bariatric surgery partially decreases neutrophil activation in patients [75]. Furthermore, obese patients exhibit reduced levels of alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT), and the levels correlate negatively with body mass index [77], indicating that neutrophils play a role in the disease progression of T2DM.

Neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration and the consequent release of granule proteins in adipose tissue in mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) contribute to the development of insulin resistance. Insulin signaling is impaired by nitration of the β subunit of the insulin receptor by MPO [78] and the degradation of insulin receptor substrate 1 by NE [79]. Therefore, mice with NE de /uniFB01 ciency [77, 79] or MPO de /uniFB01 ciency [78] have reduced adipose tissue in /uniFB02 ammation and improved carbohydrate metabolism, including improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity and a reduction in insulin resistance. Neutrophil effects can also be mediated by direct interaction with adipocytes. Neutrophil adhesion to adipocytes is mediated by the interaction of CD11b with ICAM-1 on adipocytes in vitro [80]. Adhesion results in increased IL1 β expression via the NFκ B pathway in neutrophils and contributes to the expression of chemotactic molecules and the in /uniFB01 ltration of macrophages, amplifying adipose tissue in /uniFB02 ammation and subsequently the occurrence of insulin resistance [81]. In summary, neutrophils in /uniFB01 ltrate adipose tissue in obesity and T2DM. Within adipose tissue, neutrophils secrete NE and MPO, and in mouse models of T2DM, these factors are thought to promote the development of insulin resistance and in /uniFB02 ammation in adipose tissue (Fig. 2). Future investigations in patients need to be performed to examine the contribution of neutrophil protease to T2DM progression, especially with regard to MPO as a possible target. MPO de /uniFB01 ciency in humans has been shown to increase susceptibility to fungal infections in some patient groups but does not affect in /uniFB02 ammatory disease progression [82].

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease . NAFLD is the predominant chronic liver disease worldwide and is the most common cause of mortality and morbidity associated with liver disease [83]. NAFLD involves different liver conditions, including nonalcoholic fatty liver characterized by steatosis and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) with in /uniFB02 ammation, hepatocyte damage and /uniFB01 brosis as the main features [83]. Several studies in humans and mice have pointed out a role for neutrophils in NAFLD. Neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration in the liver promotes NASH development [84], and circulating neutrophils correlate with severity in NASH patients [85].

Modulating key targets in neutrophil recruitment to the liver results in reduced disease progression. G-CSF-de /uniFB01 cient mice fed a HFD exhibit reductions in neutrophil and macrophage in /uniFB01 ltration in the liver, alleviating NAFLD progression [86]. Myeloid-p38 γ δ / -de cient mice are protected against fatty liver development and /uniFB01 glucose intolerance through reduced neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration in the liver. Consistent with these results, patients with obesity and NAFLD have increased liver p38 δ expression [87]. Moreover, tail vein injection of an adenoviral vector that overexpresses CXCL1, a chemokine implicated in neutrophil recruitment, results in enhanced neutrophil accumulation in the liver in mice fed a HFD. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced by recruited

Fig. 2 Neutrophil contributions to chronic disease. In obesity-related diseases, adipose tissue is in /uniFB01 ltrated by neutrophils, where MPO and NE are released. Neutrophils promote macrophage in /uniFB01 ltration through the secretion of IL1 β by neutrophil-adipocyte direct interactions via CD11b-ICAM. In NAFLD, neutrophils in /uniFB01 ltrate the liver, and ROS production leads to the activation of ASK and p38. The secretion of MPO promotes hepatocyte death and /uniFB01 brosis, and hepatic NE and PR3 levels increase. miR-223, which is derived from neutrophils, inhibits the NLRP3 in /uniFB02 ammasome. NETs lead to increased in /uniFB02 ammation by recruiting monocytes/macrophages. These diseases are characterized by insulin resistance and in /uniFB02 ammation. The autoimmune disease T1DM is characterized by neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration in the pancreas. β -cells of the islets release CXCL1 and 2, promoting neutrophil recruitment and in /uniFB01 ltration. CXCL1 and 2 expression is induced by IL1 β , which is secreted by macrophages. Neutrophils release NE and PR3 within the pancreas, increasing their levels. In the context of IBD, neutrophils can act either as bene cial /uniFB01 players promoting pathogen clearance and wound healing through IL22 and NETs or as detrimental players enhancing in /uniFB02 ammation via PAD4, proteases and ROS secretion. Cigarette smoke, the primary cause of COPD, inhibits apoptotic cell clearance while enhancing cell apoptosis. Chemokines released by alveolar macrophages induce neutrophil recruitment to the lung. NE and NETs trigger the transition of /uniFB01 broblasts to myo /uniFB01 broblasts, leading to increased /uniFB01 brosis. In addition, CTSG inhibits the IL22/IL22R pathway, increasing infection propensity. ASK apoptosis signal-regulating kinase, CTSG cathepsin G, CXCL CXC chemokine ligand, ICAM intercellular adhesion molecule, IL: interleukin, MPO myeloperoxidase, NAFLD nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, NE neutrophil elastase, NLRP3 NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domaincontaining protein 3, PAD4 peptidyl arginine deiminase 4, ROS reactive oxygen species, T1DM type 1 diabetes mellitus

<!-- image -->

neutrophils activate the liver stress kinases apoptosis signalregulating kinase 1 (ASK1) and p38 and promote the progression to NASH. Intraperitoneal injection of IL22-Fc, a cytokine that protects the epithelium, in mice overexpressing CXCL1 alleviates this condition by reducing in /uniFB02 ammation, liver injury and /uniFB01 brosis [88]. NGAL induces C-X-C motif chemokine receptor (CXCR)2 expression on neutrophils and results in their subsequent accumulation in the liver. Hence, Ngal de ciency in /uniFB01 apolipoprotein(Apo)e - -/ mice decreases neutrophil and macrophage in /uniFB01 ltration in the liver compared to that in Apoe - -/ mice. Accordingly, human plasma levels and hepatic expression of NGAL are increased with disease severity [89]. Neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration and NE levels in the livers of WT mice peak during the day and correlate with aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator like ( Arntl)/Bmal1 , a clock gene that is thought to induce lipogenesis. In fact, lipid accumulation was increased during the day in WT mice fed a HFD. Neutrophils promote the activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs), reducing the hepatic expression of /uniFB01 broblast growth factor 21 . Therefore, neutrophil depletion in mice diminishes the expression of Arntl/Bmal1 and circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (clock) and reduces the overall activation of JNK, reducing hepatic steatosis [90].

Plasma concentrations of the neutrophil granule proteins PR3 and NE correlate positively with disease severity in NAFLD and T2DM patients, and A1AT levels are reduced, producing an imbalance in NE/A1AT, which is a ratio associated with NASH

progression [91, 92]. Furthermore, the neutrophil-derived proteins NE, PR3 and CTSG, as well as caspase 1 and 11, contribute to liver steatosis in mice fed a HFD [93, 94]. A reduction in steatosis and in /uniFB02 ammation was also demonstrated in NE-de /uniFB01 cient mice fed a Western diet, in part through reducing the hepatic expression of ceramides and serine palmitoyltransferase subunit 2, an enzyme associated with de novo synthesis of ceramides [95]. Treatment with the protease inhibitor A1AT decreased liver lipid accumulation in WT mice fed a HFD compared to phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)-treated WT mice fed a HFD [93]. Pharmacological inhibition of NE by sivelestat diminished liver in /uniFB02 ammation in Apoe - -/ mice fed a HFD [96]. In addition to neutrophil delivery of proteases in the liver, neutrophil-derived microRNAs also contribute to disease progression. In HFD-fed mice, miR-223, which is packaged in extracellular vesicles, is transferred to hepatocytes via low-density lipoprotein receptor and APOE, leading to the inhibition of NOD-, LRRand pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) gene expression, which is involved in NAFLD progression [97].

In addition to NE, plasma MPO levels are also higher in NASH patients [98] and mouse models of NASH [99]. In mice, MPO induces hepatocyte death and the activation of hepatic stellate cells, which are collagen-producing cells that contribute to /uniFB01 brosis. In vitro, oxidative products derived from MPO activate tumor growth factor (TGF) β , and in vivo treatment of mice with a TGF β inhibitor reduced steatosis and /uniFB01 brosis. Hence, MPO de ciency in mice diminishes /uniFB01 hepatocyte injury by reducing hepatic stellate cell activation,

resulting in decreased TGF β levels and /uniFB01 brosis [100]. Additionally, low-density lipoprotein receptor ( Ldlr) - -/ Mpo - -/ mice fed a HFD had reduced hepatic neutrophil, lymphocyte, lipid, and proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokine levels and /uniFB01 brosis. These mice also display reduced visceral adipose tissue in /uniFB02 ammation [99].

MPO-DNA levels, which are a marker of NETs, are elevated in NASH patients and mouse models of NASH [101, 102]. NETs derived from NASH patients increase thrombus formation and can induce a procoagulant phenotype in ECs [101]. In a mouse model of NASH, steatosis developed independently of NETs, which indicates that NET formation occurs as a consequence of fatty liver accumulation. In this early stage, when only steatosis is present, neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration and NET formation lead to later macrophage in /uniFB01 ltration and the production of proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines. Hence, when NETosis is inhibited, a reduction in in /uniFB02 ammation is observed, including a decrease in macrophage and neutrophil levels in the liver. The progression to hepatocarcinoma is also reduced after NETosis inhibition in mice [102]. Similarly, the depletion of neutrophils by antibody injection reduced liver in /uniFB02 ammation in WT mice fed a HFD [103] and Apoe - -/ mice fed a methioninecholine-de /uniFB01 cient diet [96]. The coculture of CD4 + and CD8 + T cells with NASH-derived neutrophils suppressed the proliferation of these T cells and promoted the activation of neutrophils [85].

Neutrophils and NETs accumulate in the liver in NAFLD patients. In mice, NE, PR3 and CTSG were associated with increased steatosis, in /uniFB02 ammation, and insulin resistance, while MPO promoted the development of /uniFB01 brosis through the activation of hepatic stellate cells (Fig. 2). In combination, these mechanisms could lead to enhanced development and progression of liver disease. Therefore, by reducing neutrophil recruitment and in /uniFB01 ltration or inhibiting neutrophil proteases in mouse models, NAFLD progression can be reduced. To determine the potential role for neutrophil proteases in the development of NAFLD in humans, future studies need to be performed.

## Atherosclerosis

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of mortality worldwide [104]. The underlying pathological process of CVD is atherosclerosis, a slowly progressing chronic disorder of large and medium-sized arteries that is characterized by the accumulation of lipids in the arterial wall, the in /uniFB01 ltration of immune cells, and the formation of a /uniFB01 brous cap composed of smooth muscle cells and collagen [105]. Neutrophils are implicated in the development and progression of atherosclerosis, which has been reviewed elsewhere [106 -108]. However, as the /uniFB01 eld is continuously expanding, this review will summarize discoveries reported in 2020 and 2021.

The Apoe - -/ mouse is a hyperlipidemic mouse strain on a C57BL/6 J background that is commonly used to study the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis [109]. Wild-type mice are protected against atherosclerosis development, as most cholesterol is carried in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) particles, which ensures cholesterol elimination through the reverse cholesterol transport pathway. Therefore, this transgenic mouse model was developed to study atherosclerosis pathogenesis. Genetic deletion of Apoe increases plasma cholesterol levels to the range of 400 600 mg/dL, triggering spontaneous atherosclerosis develop--ment at approximately 20 weeks of age. High-fat and highcholesterol diets accelerate atheroma plaque formation as plasma cholesterol levels reach more than 1000 mg/dL [109, 110]. Although this mouse is the most frequently used strain to study atherosclerosis, its pathophysiology differs from that of humans. For example, human lesions occur mainly in coronary arteries, carotids and peripheral vessels, while in mice, atheroma plaques occur in the aortic root, aortic arch and innominate artery [111]. Therefore, the results from mouse studies cannot be directly translated to humans.

One mechanism by which neutrophils contribute to atherosclerosis is through NET formation. LPS administration to Apoe - -/

mice produced larger lesion sizes with the accumulation of myeloid cells and NETs. NET-associated histone 2a is responsible for monocyte adhesion to NETs in a charge-dependent manner [112]. Unstable plaques in patients have increased levels of peptidyl arginine deiminase 4 (PAD4) compared to carotid plaques with stable features [113]. Additionally, coronary thrombi in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction have increased NETs [114]. Downstream plaque regions with vulnerability features have a major numbers of neutrophils and increased expression of NE and citrullinated histone 3 (citH3) compared to upstream regions [115]. Serum autoantibodies against ApoA1, the main protein fraction of high-density lipoproteins, are a predictor of cardiovascular events. In patients with anti-ApoA1-positive serum, the citH3 signal does not colocalize with neutrophils, suggesting increased production of citH3 by neutrophils [115].

Diabetes can induce or accelerate atherosclerosis, and diabetic characteristics such as higher glucose levels, dyslipidemia and chronic in /uniFB02 ammation are involved in atherosclerosis development [116]. Hence, patients with both diabetes and atherosclerosis have been shown to have increased circulating markers of NET formation compared to patients with only atherosclerosis [117]. In a model that mimics transient intermittent hyperglycemia in Apoe - -/ mice, hyperglycemia increases lesion size, myelopoiesis and circulating monocytes and neutrophils compared to those in control mice. S100A8/A9 released by neutrophils in transient intermittent hyperglycemic mice induces myelopoiesis through RAGE activation [118]. Impaired resolution of atherosclerosis in diabetic mice correlates with increased NETs, CD68 + , NLRP3 + and caspase 1 + cell numbers, necrotic cores, and plaque sizes compared to those of nondiabetic mice. These parameters are reduced by treatment with DNase 1 [119].

In mice, neutrophil-derived MVs are present in very small amounts under homeostatic conditions but increase as a result of a HFD. In Apoe - -/ mice fed a HFD, MVs are localized in atheroprone sites, such as the inner curvature of the aortic arch where they adhere to and are internalized by ECs [120]. Within ECs, MVs release the miR-155, which is found in atheromatous plaques in Apoe - -/ mice and humans [121], resulting in monocyte recruitment and the acceleration of atheroma plaque formation [120]. Moreover, mice de /uniFB01 cient in miR-146a, which inhibits the NFκ B signaling pathway, have increased NET formation in atheromatous plaques and have increased rates of NETosis, increased levels of plasma NE and citH3, increased ROS production, and a procoagulant phenotype in response to LPS injection. Consistent with the results obtained in mice, septic patients exhibit higher plasma levels of DNA-citH3 than nonseptic patients [122].

## Autoimmune diseases

Autoimmune diseases are a varied group of disorders in which damaging immune responses to self-antigens occur. Approximately 3 -5% of the population is affected by these diseases, and this percentage is continuously increasing [123]. Autoimmune diseases include several diseases, such as type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), RA, multiple sclerosis, SLE and IBD. Neutrophils have been implicated in all of these conditions, but we will focus on T1DM and IBD. Neutrophils and RA [124], multiple sclerosis [125, 126] or SLE [127] have recently been reviewed elsewhere.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus . T1DM is a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by the destruction of insulin-producing β -cells in the islets of the pancreas, which leads to insulin de ciency /uniFB01 and a hyperglycemic state. This disease is a combination of different immunologic, genetic and physiologic events, but the exact mechanism is still unclear [128, 129].

Nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice are used as a model to study the pathophysiology of T1DM, and this model shares many similarities with human disease. NOD mice spontaneously develop

autoimmunity and T1DM with pancreatic in /uniFB01 ltration of innate immune cells at 3 weeks of age and later in /uniFB01 ltration of CD4 + and CD8 + T cells at 4 -6 weeks of age [130]. Similar to what happens in human disease, NOD mice exhibit autoantibodies and autoreactive circulating T cells, as well as β cell loss and/or dysfunction. Moreover, the locus that accounts for most of the risk in mice is MHC class II, which resembles human leukocyte antigen (HLA) in humans. A limitation of this model of human diabetes is that in NOD mice, the initial antigen is insulin, and the appearance of insulitis is more aggressive and severe, while in humans, different antigens are responsible for T1DM initiation, and insulitis is less severe [131].

Neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration [132, 133] and NE concentrations in the pancreas [132] are increased in neonatal NOD mice compared to control mice. The recruitment of neutrophils to the pancreas at this early age is caused by the expression of CXCL1 and CXCL2 by β -cells and macrophages, and this expression is induced by macrophage IL1 β secretion [133]. NETosis contributes to disease progression [134], and immune cell in /uniFB01 ltration in the pancreatic islets of NOD mice results in higher levels of citrullination than in control islets [135]. Consequently, inhibiting NE [132] or PADs [135] and the use of a CXCR2 antagonist [133] alleviate the development of diabetes in NOD mice.

Inhibiting NE by sivelestat or ela /uniFB01 n [132] or NETs by BB-Clamidine treatment [135] in NOD mice resulted in the attenuation of immune cell invasion in the pancreas, a less aggressive T cell response and a more favorable environment for immune tolerance. NET formation is also inhibited by oral staphylococcal nuclease (SNase) delivery by Lactococcus lactis . NOD mice that received SNase exhibited decreased NET formation, reduced pancreatic in /uniFB02 ammation, increased β -cell mass and enhanced glucose tolerance compared to control mice [136]. Neutrophils derived from T1DM patients are more prone to produce NETs after stimulation and have increased expression of PAD4 [137]. In vitro, NETs isolated from these patients induce the production of IFN γ by CD4 + and CD8 + T cells, which is mediated by monocytederived dendritic cells and characterized by lower levels of the antimicrobial peptides MPO and LL37 than NETs isolated from control subjects [138].

Subjects with a high risk of developing T1DM and newly diagnosed T1DM patients have lower circulating levels of neutrophils [139 -142], which correlate with reduced serum levels of NE and PR3 [143] and faster disease progression [142, 144]. Lower levels circulating neutrophils are attributed to increased in /uniFB01 ltration in the pancreas [141, 142]. The correlation between disease progression and neutrophil counts has been shown to be age-dependent [142], which might explain studies that have shown increased levels of NET-associated proteins [145] and circulating levels of NE and PR3 [146] in newly diagnosed T1DM patients. Neutrophil counts are thus decreased in the circulation of T1DM patients but increased in the pancreas. In the pancreas, neutrophils release proteases and NETs, promoting an in /uniFB02 ammatory response (Fig. 2).

In /uniFB02 ammatory bowel disease . IBD includes Crohn's disease and UC. The diseases differ with regard to the in /uniFB02 ammatory site. Crohn 's disease can affect any zone of the gastrointestinal tract, whereas UC is restricted to the colon. Several factors contribute to the development of these diseases and are a combination of genetic susceptibility, environmental factors, microbiota and immune system response [147]. The hallmark of active IBD is the in /uniFB01 ltration of neutrophils in the intestine, but whether these cells play a protective or harmful role is still unclear.

To study IBD in mice, the most widely used model is dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis. The administration of 1 -5% DSS in drinking water produces severe colitis that resembles human disease and is characterized by diarrhea, ulcerations, intestinal in /uniFB02 ammation, body weight loss and shortening of colon

length. DSS damages the epithelial layer of the large intestine, permitting the dissemination of proin /uniFB02 ammatory factors to the tissue. Variations in DSS concentrations and administration frequency allow for the modeling of acute and chronic intestinal in /uniFB02 ammation. Although disease progression has several similarities with that in humans, there are differences, including the lack of T and B cell contributions to the development of the disease in this mouse model [148, 149].

In DSS-induced colitis mice, there was evident cell-free DNA and NET formation and deposition [7, 150] and elevated PAD4 expression in the colon [150]. In these studies, DNase 1 treatment or neutrophil depletion with anti-Ly6G antibody decreased colitis development and colitis-associated tumorigenesis [7], and treatment with streptonigrin, a PAD4 inhibitor, diminished citH3 levels in the intestine and colon in /uniFB02 ammation [150]. Similar to the mouse model, patients with UC have elevated expression of PAD4 and increased levels of NE, MPO and citH3 in the intestinal mucosa. Neutrophils derived from UC patients produce increased amounts of NETs as a response to TNF α treatment. PAD4 in the affected mucosa and enhanced NET production are thought to augment intestinal in /uniFB02 ammation [150].

In addition to the contribution of NETs, neutrophil production of ROS, which is modulated by MAPK-activated protein kinase 2, has been shown to contribute to DSS-induced colitis in mice [151]. In general, neutrophils from IBD patients release more NETs that localize in the colon, and NET degradation is impaired compared to neutrophils from healthy subjects [7]. Monocyte chemotactic protein 1-induced protein 1 (MCPIP1) is highly expressed in neutrophils from the in /uniFB02 amed colons of IBD patients and reduces neutrophil migration and the release of MPO, ROS and proin/uniFB02 ammatory cytokines from neutrophils [152]. Although neutrophils isolated from IBD patients produce proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines [152], in general, the amount of proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines produced by neutrophils in vitro is lower than that produced by other leukocyte populations, such as monocytes/ macrophages [153].

CD177, which regulates endothelial transmigration [154], is highly expressed in circulating neutrophils and the mucosa of IBD patients. Speci /uniFB01 cally, CD177 + cells produce lower levels of proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines and have higher bactericidal activity than other cells, suggesting a protective role of this neutrophil subset. Accordingly, colitis mice that are de cient /uniFB01 in CD177 + neutrophils have a compromised intestinal barrier and increased colitis development [155]. The stimulation of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cell (TREM) -1 with an agonistic antibody induced CD177 + neutrophils that produced NETs and IL22 and induced pathogen clearance and wound healing, alleviating colitis [156]. In addition, neutrophils could maintain intestinal barrier homeostasis through TGF β 1 [157] and IL22 secretion [158]. TGF β 1 promotes amphiregulin production by intestinal epithelial cells [157], whereas IL22, which is produced in response to IL23 and TNF , enhances the secretion of antimicrobial peptides such as α S100A8/A9 [158], resulting in the restoration of epithelial barrier function and the resolution of colitis. Therefore, neutrophil depletion or the inhibition of neutrophil adhesion by means of anti-L-selectin aggravates dinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis [159].

These studies indicate that neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration in the colon and intestine contributes to in /uniFB02 ammation in IBD. IBD patients exhibit increased NET release, PAD4 expression and protease levels. However, speci /uniFB01 c intestinal and colonic neutrophils are crucial for maintaining intestinal barrier function (Fig. 2). The dual role of neutrophils in IBD [160] requires further investigation to determine if neutrophil function is situation dependent.

## Chronic obstructive lung disease

COPD is a major cause of chronic morbidity and was the third leading cause of death worldwide in 2015. The primary cause of

184

COPD is exposure to CS, but other factors, such as air pollution or fumes, have been implicated. The main features of this disease are air /uniFB02 ow limitation, emphysematous alveolar wall destruction, local and systemic chronic in /uniFB02 ammation of the airways, alveoli and microvasculature, and recurrent infections. Overall, these disease components result in lung failure and ultimately death. Bacterial and viral infections exacerbate in /uniFB02 ammation, hypoxia and airway damage in this disease [23, 161, 162].

To study COPD in mice, the most frequently used model is exposure to CS, as CS is the most important risk factor for human COPD. However, the results between studies are dif /uniFB01 cult to compare because the type of cigarettes and their composition, the exposure method (whole body or nose-only), and the dose differ [163]. CS exposure models have several similarities with human pathology, such as an increase in lung in /uniFB02 ammation and airway /uniFB01 brosis. However, exposed mice do not produce excessive mucus, periods of exacerbation are absent, and only mild emphysema and modest remodeling of the pulmonary microvasculature occur [163 -165].

In vivo acute cigarette smoke exposure inhibits the clearance of apoptotic cells, including alveolar macrophages and neutrophils, in a reversible manner, whereas chronic cigarette exposure irreversibly inhibits efferocytosis, which contributes to the development of COPD [166]. In fact, cigarette smoke exposure induces cell death in neutrophils with the characteristics of apoptosis, autophagy and necrosis in vitro [167].

One of the main features of COPD is neutrophilic in /uniFB02 ammation, which correlates with airway obstruction [168] and peripheral airway dysfunction [169]. In /uniFB01 ltration of neutrophils in the lungs is driven by chemotactic factors such as CXCL1, CXCL5, leukotriene B4 and CXCL8, which are produced by epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages [170, 171]. In vitro studies using air-liquid interface cell cultures showed that COPD airway epithelia exhibited enhanced chemotactic activity. Recombinant human club cell secretory protein can neutralize CXCL8 and thereby prevent neutrophil recruitment to the airways [172]. The CXCR2 antagonist MK-7123 improved lung function in patients with moderate to severe COPD, but long-term treatment was associated with a reduction in circulating neutrophils and a slightly increased rate of infections [173].

In healthy people, epithelial lung injury can be caused by infections, in /uniFB02 ammation, or exposure to cigarette smoke when neutrophils migrate to the airspaces across the epithelium. The epithelium is repaired through epithelial cell proliferation through neutrophil-mediated activation of the β -catenin pathway, which targets cell proliferation genes in epithelial cells in the lung [174]. In COPD, this repair process is impaired, which contributes to chronic in /uniFB02 ammation [175]. Myo /uniFB01 broblasts, which are key cells in the wound healing process, undergo programmed cell death to restore normal tissue architecture and function under homeostatic conditions when the healing process is complete. When this process is dysregulated, the deposition of excessive extracellular matrix and destruction of lung architecture contribute to decreased lung function and tissue pathology [176]. NETs and NE promote the differentiation of lung /uniFB01 broblasts to myo bro/uniFB01 blasts [177, 178]. NE de ciency in a mouse model of idiopathic /uniFB01 pulmonary /uniFB01 brosis results in a reduced number of myo /uniFB01 broblasts [177]. Additionally, in patients with /uniFB01 brotic interstitial lung disease, NETs are detected close to α -smooth muscle actin-expressing /uniFB01 broblasts. Experiments with human-derived neutrophils have revealed that myo broblasts /uniFB01 treated with NETs gain a /uniFB01 brotic phenotype characterized by increased collagen production and proliferation/migration [178]. Similarly, the severity of COPD correlates with sputum NET complexes, and the capacity for phagocytosis is reduced in patients with higher levels of NETs in the sputum [179]. NETosis is induced by the infection of neutrophils with H. in /uniFB02 uenzae and is thought to be a mechanism for IL6 receptor shedding from neutrophils in COPD. Furthermore,

in bronchoalveolar lavage /uniFB02 uid (BALF) from patients with COPD, the levels of shed IL6 receptor positively correlate with markers of NETs [180].

Recurrent pulmonary infections are a hallmark of COPD. In patients with COPD, blood neutrophil counts are increased during exacerbations and are related to long-term mortality. Patients with high blood neutrophil counts also have decreased microbiota diversity [181]. Moreover, NE levels in the sputum [182] and NE mRNA expression in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of COPD patients [183] are elevated during COPD exacerbations. Similarly, sputum MPO levels also increase during exacerbation in COPD patients [184]. Therefore, treatment with an MPO inhibitor resulted in decreased oxidative stress and halted emphysema progression and small airway remodeling in guinea pigs exposed to cigarette smoke [185]. Patients with COPD who smoke have elevated serum levels of MMP9, NGAL and proMMP9/NGAL compared to nonsmokers with COPD [186]. In another set of COPD patients, the expression levels of MMP12 and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteases (TIMP) 4 were elevated, and MMP12 levels correlated with the severity of air /uniFB02 ow limitation [183]. MVs derived from leukocytes present in the BALF of COPD patients were characterized and showed that neutrophil MV levels were higher in patients than in control individuals and that the presence of MVs correlated with COPD severity [187].

Endogenous antimicrobial defense is fundamental in overcoming an infection, and IL22/IL22R signaling is involved in host defense. However, in COPD, proteases derived from neutrophils, such as CTSG, have been shown to cleave IL22R, disrupting the signaling pathway, reducing the antimicrobial effects and facilitating bacterial infections. In addition, the release of these proteases is enhanced after cigarette smoke exposure, and the products generated by proteolysis serve as proin /uniFB02 ammatory stimuli [188] that exacerbate the in /uniFB02 ammatory condition.

In summary, patients with COPD have elevated levels of neutrophils in circulation and the lung. Within the lung, neutrophils release NETs and NE, which promote the transition from /uniFB01 broblasts to myo /uniFB01 broblasts, and CTSG, which inhibits the IL22/IL22R pathway. Overall, these factors promote lung /uniFB01 brosis, tissue destruction and the disruption of antimicrobial defense (Fig. 2).

## Therapeutic implications and future considerations

The studies summarized in the previous section show that the contribution of neutrophils to chronic disease is signi /uniFB01 cant. Although the pathology of the chronic diseases described here varies greatly, the role of neutrophils in these diseases has common features, such as protease release, NET formation and impacts on other immune cells. Therefore, it is tempting to consider targeting neutrophil function as a strategy to alleviate signs and symptoms of disease or to halt the low-grade systemic in /uniFB02 ammation that creates a vicious cycle that worsens the chronic condition. Based on neutrophil biology, it is possible to limit their effects by disrupting several steps, such as mobilization from the bone marrow, recruitment to the tissue, release of proteases and formation of NETs. Table 1 summarizes targets and inhibitors used to interfere with neutrophil function in atherosclerosis, T1DM and T2DM, COPD, NAFLD and IBD, the disease models and the results of the studies. Most studies are in the experimental and preclinical phase, and the summary serves as a direction for future investigations with regard to side effects and possible use in patients.

In addition to directly targeting neutrophil recruitment or neutrophil effects in the tissue, it is possible to interfere with other immune cells that promote neutrophil recruitment through cytokine production. The excessive neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration seen in some chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory conditions can generate a positive feedback loop, as recruited neutrophils produce chemoattractants, which leads to even more recruitment. Interference with neutrophil accumulation using a CXCR2 blocking antibody improved clinical

<!-- image -->

| Main result Reference                         | Reduced recruitment of neutrophils from blood to pancreas attenuated development of disease. [133] Increased lung function (assessed by FEV1), reduction in sputum neutrophils. Decrease in circulating neutrophils and slight increase in total and respiratory infections with long-term treatment. [173]   | Patients with moderate to severe COPD                 | Reduced neutrophil chemotaxis. [172] Reduced arterial myeloid cell adhesion, atherosclerotic lesion formation and macrophage [201]           | accumulation. Reduction in cardiovascular events. [204, 205]                                                   | De ciency in G-CSF resulted in attenuated insulin /uniFB01 resistance and hepatic steatosis. [86]   | Inhibition of NE attenuated macrophage in /uniFB01 ltration [132]   | and T-cell mediated destruction of pancreatic beta- cells resulting in reduction in spontaneous development of disease. [78]   | De ciency in or inhibition of MPO improved insulin /uniFB01 sensitivity. mice fed a high-fat, high- Alleviation of metabolic syndrome components [96]   | De ciency in of inhibition of NE improved insulin /uniFB01 sensitivity and decreased adipose tissue in /uniFB02 ammation. [77]   | De ciency in NE decreased adipose tissue /uniFB01 in /uniFB02 ammation and reduced insulin resistance. [79]   | /uniFB01 [89]            | Mice fed high-fat, high-cholesterol diet De ciency in NGAL alleviated hepatic injury, in /uniFB02 ammation and in /uniFB01 ltration of neutrophils. Mice fed Western diet De ciency in NE resulted in reduced in /uniFB01 /uniFB02 ammation [95]   | of the liver. mice fed high-fat diet De ciency of MPO resulted in reduced hepatic /uniFB01 [99]   | Reduced levels of citrullination in pancreas prevented development of disease. [135]   | Decrease in serum NETs, NE and PR3. Treatment resulted in delayed onset of disease. [206]   | Reduction of NETs in colon. Alleviation of clinical colitis index and tissue in /uniFB02 ammation. [151]   | DSS induced UC in mice Decreased NETs in colon, alleviation of clinical signs and tissue in /uniFB02 ammation. [207]   |
|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Chronic disease Experimental set up           | T1DM NOD mice COPD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                       | COPD In vitro air-liquid interface cell culture CCR2 antagonist (RS102895) daily at ZT17 Atherosclerosis Apoe - - / mice fed a high-fat diet | Atherosclerosis Randomized trial in patients with prior history of MI and high-sensitivity C- reactive protein | NAFLD Mice fed high-fat diet                                                                        | T1DM NOD mice                                                       | T2DM Mice fed high-fat diet                                                                                                    | NAFLD Apoe - - /                                                                                                                                        | T2DM Mice fed high-fat diet                                                                                                      | T2DM Mice fed high-fat diet                                                                                   | NAFLD                    | NAFLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | NAFLD Ldlr - - /                                                                                  | T1DM NOD mice                                                                          | T1DM NOD mice                                                                               | IBD TNBS-induced colitis in mice                                                                           | IBD                                                                                                                    |
| Neutrophil functionality Target and inhibitor | Recruitment CXCR2 antagonist SB225002                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Daily oral administration of CXCR2 antagonist MK-7123 | IL-8 (CXCL8) neutralization with rhCCSP                                                                                                      | Canakinumab (monoclonal antibody targeting IL-1 β )                                                            | Genetic deletion of G-CSF                                                                           | Degranulation NE was inhibited by sivelestat or ela /uniFB01 n      |                                                                                                                                | Genetic deletion of MPO Inhibition of MPO by 4-aminobenzoic acid hydrazide administered ip NE was inhibited by sivelestat                               | Genetic deletion of NE Daily oral administration of NE inhibitor GW311616A                                                       | Genetic deletion of NE                                                                                        | Genetic deletion of NGAL | Genetic deletion of NE                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Genetic deletion of MPO                                                                           | NET formation PAD inhibition by BB-Cl-amidine                                          | DNA degradation by SNase delivered                                                          | PAD inhibition by Cl-amidine oral                                                                          | DNA degradation by oral administration of Staphylococcal nuclease (SNase/ ALG-                                         |

186

| Main result Reference Treated mice were protected from colitis as well as [7]                                    | thrombus formation and platelet activation. Reduction in PAD4-positive cells and NET-associated proteins. /uniFB02 [150]   | Reduction in colonic in ammation. Inhibition of PAD4 resulted in attenuated endothelial injury in a mouse model of super /uniFB01 cial erosion. [202]   | mice fed a high fat diet, model for unstable plaque Blockade of NET release (pharmacological or genetic) and speci /uniFB01 c inhibition of histone H4 [208]   | reduced plaque vulnerability.                                                                         | /uniFB01 ed high fat diet Decreased intimal permeability and protection of intimal integrity. [209] Reduction in atherosclerotic lesion area and [210]   | protection from arterial thrombosis. DSS-induced colitis in mice Decreased colon in /uniFB02 ammation [211]   | Inhibition of NET formation did not reduce fatty liver development, but resulted in reduced hepatocarcinoma. [102]   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Chronic disease Experimental set up DSS induced UC in mice                                                       | Patients with UC DSS induced UC in mice                                                                                    | Apoe - - / mice                                                                                                                                         | Apoe - - /                                                                                                                                                     | Atherosclerosis Ldlr - - / mice fed modi (1.25% cholesterol), model for                               | unstable plaque Atherosclerosis Apoe - - / mice fed a high fat diet                                                                                      |                                                                                                               | NASH induced by neonatal streptozotocin and high-fat diet in mice                                                    |
| Target and inhibitor DNA degradation by iv injection of DNase I IBD Anti-TNF-alpha (in /uniFB02 iximab) infusion | PAD4 was inhibited by ip administration of streptonigrin IBD                                                               | PAD4 inhibitor in collagen IV directed nanoparticles Atherosclerosis Daily subcutaneous administration of Cl-                                           | amidine or genetic deletion of PAD4 to inhibit NET release. Atherosclerosis                                                                                    | Intraperitoneal injection of anti- histone H4 Genetic de /uniFB01 ciency in PAD4 or DNase I treatment | Inhibition of PAD4 by daily subcutaneous injections with Cl-amide                                                                                        | Therapeutic anti-citrullinated protein antibody (tACPA) to inhibit NET formation IBD                          | Genetic de /uniFB01 ciency in PAD4 or DNase I treatment NAFLD                                                        |

scores in mouse models of RA and atopic dermatitis [189]. However, in a study of patients with COPD, the reversible CXCR2 antagonist danirixin did not yield bene /uniFB01 cial results [190].

Considering neutrophil function in acute in /uniFB02 ammation, one strategy to interfere with neutrophils would be to promote proresolving effects. By promoting the resolution of in /uniFB02 ammation by reducing neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration, producing proin /uniFB02 ammatory mediators and enhancing the clearance of cellular debris and apoptotic cells, it could be possible to halt some chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory conditions. The importance of in /uniFB02 ammation resolution in aging was highlighted in a study using mice lacking lipoxin A4/formyl peptide receptor 2 (ALX/FPR2). Following myocardial infarction, FPR2-de /uniFB01 cient mice had decreased numbers of resolving macrophages and increased numbers of neutrophils at the site of injury, indicating that FPR2 could play an important role in resolution following ischemic injury [191]. Resolvin E1 (RvE1), an anti-in /uniFB02 ammatory lipid mediator derived from the ω -3 fatty acid eicosapentaenoic acid, promotes phagocytosis-induced apoptosis in neutrophils in vitro and in mouse models of acute lung injury [192]. Obese individuals with higher expression of the receptor for RvE1 in adipose tissue have attenuated adipose tissue in /uniFB02 ammation, increased liver insulin sensitivity and reduced levels of proin /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines in the circulation. Genetic deletion of the receptor in mice is associated with increased adipose tissue and liver in /uniFB02 ammation [193]. Conversely, weight loss in patients with metabolic syndrome leads to an enhanced ability of neutrophils to release RvE1 [194]. Dietary supplementation with eicosapentaenoic acid in mice fed a HFD resulted in improved glycemic control partially through RvE1 [195] and decreased atherosclerotic plaque formation in Apoe - -/ mice fed a Western diet [196]. The data with regard to supplementation in patients vary. For example, patients with elevated triglycerides who received icosapent, a highly puri /uniFB01 ed eicosapentaenoic acid ethyl ester, had a reduced risk of cardiovascular events [197]. A metaanalysis of large trials investigating the correlation between omega-3 fatty acid supplements and cardiovascular disease showed that supplementation had no positive effect on outcomes in patients with a history of cardiovascular disease [198]. These differences may in part be due to genetic variations in the population [195] and warrants further investigation.

Future studies targeting neutrophils in chronic in /uniFB02 ammation need to consider methods to limit the side effects of treatments. Neutrophils are critical in the acute in /uniFB02 ammatory response to infection, and the complete ablation of neutrophils will lead to increased risks of infection, as with the antagonism of CXCR2 in COPD [173, 190] and delayed healing [199]. Possible methods to limit side effects are chronopharmacology and targeted drug delivery with nanoparticles. Recent /uniFB01 ndings highlight the importance of considering circadian rhythm in the treatment of in /uniFB02 ammatory disease [200]. For example, time optimization of CCR2 neutralization results in limited macrovascular myeloid cell recruitment and atheroprogression without disturbing microvascular recruitment in Apoe-de /uniFB01 cient mice fed a HFD [201]. Another method to optimize effects is through spacial targeting and can be performed by nanoparticle formulations that are directed to certain tissues. Collagen IV-targeted nanoparticles were used to selectively deliver the PAD4 inhibitor GSK484 to regions with endothelial cell shedding and collagen IV exposure in Apoede cient /uniFB01 mice. Targeted treatment resulted in reduced NET accumulation and the attenuation of the risk for plaque rupture at sites of intimal injury [202]. In a model of IBD in mice, delivery of a proresolving annexin A1-mimetic peptide using oxidationresponsive nanoparticles that released their content at sites with high expression of ROS resulted in decreased colon in /uniFB02 ammation and enhanced efferocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils [203]. Chronopharmacology and targeted delivery are promising new /uniFB01 elds of study in the search for ef /uniFB01 cient and safe treatment strategies in chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory disease.

## CONCLUSION

Neutrophils are commonly involved in several chronic in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases and mainly exacerbate disease through different mechanisms, including neutrophil accumulation within the tissue, protease release and NET formation. Thus, several studies have focused on targeting neutrophil function as a possible treatment. In this sense, most strategies were centered on reducing neutrophil recruitment and inhibiting protease release and NET formation. As neutrophils contribute to many chronic diseases and have similar components, treatment strategies that work in one disease might be bene /uniFB01 cial in other chronic diseases and warrant further investigation. Finally, future studies should aim to limit side effects such as increased infection propensity, which could be accomplished by chronopharmacology or targeted delivery of drugs.

## REFERENCES

- 1. Molinaro R, Yu M, Sausen G, Bichsel CA, Corbo C, Folco EJ, et al. Resolution of in /uniFB02 ammation: an integrated view. EMBO Mol Med. 2013;5:661 -74.
- 2. Serhan CN, Gupta SK, Perretti M, Godson C, Brennan E, Li Y, et al. The Atlas of In /uniFB02 ammation Resolution (AIR). Mol Asp Med. 2020;74:100894.
- 3. Roth GA. Global, regional, and national age-sex-speci /uniFB01 c mortality for 282 causes of death in 195 countries and territories, 1980 -2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet. 2018;392:1736 -88.
- 4. Franceschi C, Garagnani P, Vitale G, Capri M, Salvioli S. In /uniFB02 ammaging and Garb-' aging. Trends. Endocrinol Metab. 2017;28:199 -212.
- 5. Furman D, Campisi J, Verdin E, Carrera-Bastos P, Targ S, Franceschi C, et al. Chronic in /uniFB02 ammation in the etiology of disease across the life span. Nat Med. 2019;25:1822 -32.
- 6. Peiseler M, Kubes P. More friend than foe: the emerging role of neutrophils in tissue repair. J Clin Invest. 2019;129:2629 -39.
- 7. Li T, Wang C, Liu Y, Li B, Zhang W, Wang L, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps induce intestinal damage and thrombotic tendency in in /uniFB02 ammatory bowel disease. J Crohn s Colitis. 2020;14:240 ' -53.
- 8. Herster F, Bittner Z, Codrea MC, Archer NK, Heister M, Löf /uniFB02 er MW, et al. Platelets aggregate with neutrophils and promote skin pathology in psoriasis. Front Immunol. 2019;10:1867.
- 9. Yamamoto-Furusho JK, Mendieta-Escalante EA. Diagnostic utility of the neutrophil-platelet ratio as a novel marker of activity in patients with Ulcerative Colitis. PLoS One. 2020;15:e0231988.
- 10. Liang X, Xiu C, Liu M, Lin C, Chen H, Bao R, et al. Platelet-neutrophil interaction aggravates vascular in /uniFB02 ammation and promotes the progression of atherosclerosis by activating the TLR4/NFκ B pathway. J Cell Biochem. 2019;120:5612 -9.
- 11. Sreeramkumar V, Adrover JM, Ballesteros I, Cuartero MI, Rossaint J, Bilbao I, et al. Neutrophils scan for activated platelets to initiate in /uniFB02 ammation. Sci (80-). 2014;346:1234 -8.
- 12. Perdomo J, Leung H, Ahmadi Z, Yan F, Chong J, Passam FH, et al. Neutrophil activation and NETosis are the major drivers of thrombosis in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Nat Commun. 2019;10:1322.
- 13. Kraakman MJ, Lee MK, Al-Sharea A, Dragoljevic D, Barrett TJ, Montenont E, et al. Neutrophil-derived S100 calcium-binding proteins A8/A9 promote reticulated thrombocytosis and atherogenesis in diabetes. J Clin Invest. 2017;127:2133 -47.
- 14. Deppermann C, Kubes P. Start a /uniFB01 re, kill the bug: the role of platelets in in /uniFB02 ammation and infection. Innate Immun. 2018;24:335 -48.
- 15. Pircher J, Engelmann B, Massberg S, Schulz C. Platelet-neutrophil crosstalk in atherothrombosis. Thromb Haemost. 2019;119:1274 -82.
- 16. Ramirez GA, Manfredi AA, Maugeri N. Misunderstandings between platelets and neutrophils build in chronic in /uniFB02 ammation. Front Immunol. 2019;10:2491.
- 17. Matsumoto K, Yasuoka H, Yoshimoto K, Suzuki K, Takeuchi T. Platelet CXCL4 mediates neutrophil extracellular traps formation in ANCA-associated vasculitis. Sci Rep. 2021;11:222.
- 18. Gaertner F, Ahmad Z, Rosenberger G, Fan S, Nicolai L, Busch B, et al. Migrating platelets are mechano-scavengers that collect and bundle bacteria. Cell. 2017;171:1368 -1382.e23.
- 19. Pircher J, Czermak T, Ehrlich A, Eberle C, Gaitzsch E, Margraf A, et al. Cathelicidins prime platelets to mediate arterial thrombosis and tissue in /uniFB02 ammation. Nat Commun. 2018;9:1523.
- 20. Kuravi SJ, Harrison P, Rainger GE, Nash GB. Ability of platelet-derived extracellular vesicles to promote neutrophil-endothelial cell interactions. In /uniFB02 ammation. 2019;42:290 -305.
- 21. Maugeri N, Capobianco A, Rovere-Querini P, Ramirez GA, Tombetti E, Valle PD, et al. Platelet microparticles sustain autophagy-associated activation of neutrophils in systemic sclerosis. Sci Transl Med. 2018;10:eaao3089.

## 188

- 22. Costa S, Bevilacqua D, Cassatella MA, Scapini P. Recent advances on the crosstalk between neutrophils and B or T lymphocytes. Immunology. 2019;156:23 -32.
- 23. Rabe KF, Watz H. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Lancet. 2017;389:1931 -40.
- 24. Nascimento M, Huot-Marchand S, Gombault A, Panek C, Bourinet M, Fanny M, et al. B-cell activating factor secreted by neutrophils is a critical player in lung in /uniFB02 ammation to cigarette smoke exposure. Front Immunol. 2020;11:1622.
- 25. Malmström V, Grönwall C. The parallel worlds of ACPA-positive and RF-positive B cells. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2018;14:626 -8.
- 26. Kristyanto H, Blomberg NJ, Slot LM, van der Voort E, Kerkman PF, Bakker A, et al. Persistently activated, proliferative memory autoreactive B cells promote in /uniFB02 ammation in rheumatoid arthritis. Sci Transl Med. 2020;12:eaaz5327.
- 27. Gestermann N, Di Domizio J, Lande R, Demaria O, Frasca L, Feldmeyer L, et al. Netting neutrophils activate autoreactive B cells in lupus. J Immunol. 2018;200:3364 -71.
- 28. Chen C, Tan L, Zhu W, Lei L, Kuang Y, Liu P, et al. Targeting myeloid-derived suppressor cells is a novel strategy for anti-psoriasis therapy. Mediators In /uniFB02 amm. 2020;2020:8567320.
- 29. Beauvillain C, Delneste Y, Scotet M, Peres A, Gascan H, Guermonprez P, et al. Neutrophils ef /uniFB01 ciently cross-prime naive T cells in vivo. Blood. 2007;110:2965 -73.
- 30. Vono M, Lin A, Norrby-Teglund A, Koup RA, Liang F, Loré K. Neutrophils acquire the capacity for antigen presentation to memory CD4 + T cells in vitro and ex vivo. Blood. 2017;129:1991 -2001.
- 31. Carmona-Rivera C, Carlucci PM, Moore E, Lingampalli N, Uchtenhagen H, James E, et al. Synovial /uniFB01 broblast-neutrophil interactions promote pathogenic adaptive immunity in rheumatoid arthritis. Sci Immunol. 2017;2:eaag3358.
- 32. Prame Kumar K, Nicholls AJ, Wong C. Partners in crime: neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages in in /uniFB02 ammation and disease. Cell Tissue Res. 2018;371:551 -65.
- 33. Soehnlein O, Zernecke A, Eriksson EE, Rothfuchs AG, Pham CT, Herwald H, et al. Neutrophil secretion products pave the way for in /uniFB02 ammatory monocytes. Blood. 2008;112:1461 -71.
- 34. Soehnlein O, Lindbom L, Weber C. Mechanisms underlying neutrophil-mediated monocyte recruitment. Blood. 2009;114:4613 -23.
- 35. Påhlman LI, Mörgelin M, Eckert J, Johansson L, Russell W, Riesbeck K, et al. Streptococcal M protein: a multipotent and powerful inducer of in /uniFB02 ammation. J Immunol. 2006;177:1221 -8.
- 36. Soehnlein O, Kai-Larsen Y, Frithiof R, Sorensen OE, Kenne E, ScharffetterKochanek K, et al. Neutrophil primary granule proteins HBP and HNP1-3 boost bacterial phagocytosis by human and murine macrophages. J Clin Invest. 2008;118:3491 -502.
- 37. Van Den Bosch MH, Blom AB, Schelbergen RF, Koenders MI, van de Loo FA, van den Berg WB, et al. Alarmin S100A9 induces proin /uniFB02 ammatory and catabolic effects predominantly in the M1 macrophages of human osteoarthritic synovium. J Rheumatol. 2016;43:1874 -84.
- 38. Warnatsch A, Ioannou M, Wang Q, Papayannopoulos V. In /uniFB02 ammation. Neutrophil extracellular traps license macrophages for cytokine production in atherosclerosis. Science. 2015;349:316 -20.
- 39. Nakazawa D, Shida H, Kusunoki Y, Miyoshi A, Nishio S, Tomaru U, et al. The responses of macrophages in interaction with neutrophils that undergo NETosis. J Autoimmun. 2016;67:19 -28.
- 40. Cirone KM, Lahiri P, Holani R, Tan YL, Arrazuria R, De Buck J, et al. Synthetic cathelicidin LL-37 reduces Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis internalization and pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines in macrophages. Cell Tissue Res. 2020;379:207 -17.
- 41. Torres-Juarez F, Cardenas-Vargas A, Montoya-Rosales A, González-Curiel I, Garcia-Hernandez MH, Enciso-Moreno JA, et al. LL-37 immunomodulatory activity during Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in macrophages. Infect Immun. 2015;83:4495 -503.
- 42. Brown KL, Poon GF, Birkenhead D, Pena OM, Falsa /uniFB01 R, Dahlgren C, et al. Host defense peptide LL-37 selectively reduces proin /uniFB02 ammatory macrophage responses. J Immunol. 2011;186:5497 -505.
- 43. Ribon M, Seninet S, Mussard J, Sebbag M, Clavel C, Serre G, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps exert both pro- and anti-in /uniFB02 ammatory actions in rheumatoid arthritis that are modulated by C1q and LL-37. J Autoimmun. 2019;98:122 -31.
- 44. Rhys HI, Dell'Accio F, Pitzalis C, Moore A, Norling LV, Perretti M. Neutrophil microvesicles from healthy control and rheumatoid arthritis patients prevent the in /uniFB02 ammatory activation of macrophages. EBioMedicine. 2018;29:60 -9.
- 45. Bouchery T, Harris N. Neutrophil -macrophage cooperation and its impact on tissue repair. Immunol Cell Biol. 2019;97:289 -98.
- 46. Bagaitkar J, Huang J, Zeng MY, Pech NK, Monlish DA, Perez-Zapata LJ, et al. NADPH oxidase activation regulates apoptotic neutrophil clearance by murine macrophages. Blood. 2018;131:2367 -78.
- 47. Chernykh ER, Sakhno LV, Shevela EY, Tikhonova MA, Khonina NA, Ostanin AA. Phenotypic and functional changes of GM-CSF differentiated human macrophages following exposure to apoptotic neutrophils. Cell Immunol. 2018;331:93 -9.
- 48. Marwick JA, Mills R, Kay O, Michail K, Stephen J, Rossi AG, et al. Neutrophils induce macrophage anti-in /uniFB02 ammatory reprogramming by suppressing NF- B κ activation. Cell Death Dis. 2018;9:665.
- 49. Ferraro B, Leoni G, Hinkel R, Ormanns S, Paulin N, Ortega-Gomez A, et al. Proangiogenic macrophage phenotype to promote myocardial repair. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:2990 -3002.
- 50. Scapini P, Marini O, Tecchio C, Cassatella MA. Human neutrophils in the saga of cellular heterogeneity: insights and open questions. Immunol Rev. 2016;273:48 -60.
- 51. Hacbarth E, Kajdacsy-Balla A. Low density neutrophils in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and acute rheumatic fever. Arthritis Rheum. 1986;29:1334 -42.
- 52. Fresneda Alarcon M, McLaren Z, Wright HL. Neutrophils in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus: same foe different M.O. Front Immunol. 2021;12:649693.
- 53. Mistry P, Nakabo S, O'Neil L, Goel RR, Jiang K, Carmona-Rivera C, et al. Transcriptomic, epigenetic, and functional analyses implicate neutrophil diversity in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2019;116:25222 -8.
- 54. Silvestre-Roig C, Fridlender ZG, Glogauer M, Scapini P. Neutrophil diversity in health and disease. Trends Immunol. 2019;40:565 -83.
- 55. Veglia F, Perego M, Gabrilovich D. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells coming of age. Nat Immunol. 2018;19:108 -19.
- 56. Lecot P, Sarabi M, Pereira Abrantes M, Mussard J, Koenderman L, Caux C, et al. Neutrophil heterogeneity in cancer: from biology to therapies. Front Immunol. 2019;10:2155.
- 57. Hedrick CC, Malanchi I. Neutrophils in cancer: heterogeneous and multifaceted. Nat Rev Immunol. 2021.
- 58. Rogers T, DeBerardinis RJ. Metabolic plasticity of neutrophils: relevance to pathogen responses and cancer. Trends Cancer. 2021;7:700 -13.
- 59. Cohen TS, Takahashi V, Bonnell J, Tovchigrechko A, Chaerkady R, Yu W, et al. Staphylococcus aureus drives expansion of low-density neutrophils in diabetic mice. J Clin Invest. 2019;129:2133 -44.
- 60. Blanco-Camarillo C, Alemán OR, Rosales C. Low-density neutrophils in healthy individuals display a mature primed phenotype. Front Immunol. 2021;12:672520.
- 61. Gabrilovich DI. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Cancer Immunol Res. 2017;5:3 -8.
- 62. Islam J, Lee HJ, Yang SH, Kim DK, Joo KW, Kim YS, et al. Expansion of myeloidderived suppressor cells correlates with renal progression in type 2 diabetic nephropathy. Immune Netw. 2020;20:e18.
- 63. Brajer-Luftmann B, Nowicka A, Kaczmarek M, Grabicki M, Ku nar-Kami ź ń ska B, Bromi ń ska B, et al. Myeloid derived suppressor cells in bronchoalveolar lavage -/uniFB02 uid in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2016;126:980 -8.
- 64. Zhang H, Lian M, Zhang J, Bian Z, Tang R, Miao Q, et al. A functional characteristic of cysteine-rich protein 61: Modulation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in liver in /uniFB02 ammation. Hepatology. 2018;67:232 -46.
- 65. Zhou Z, Lai P, Zhang S, Wang Y, Qu N, Lu D, et al. The relationship between hepatic myeloid-derived suppressor cells and clinicopathological parameters in patients with chronic liver disease. Biomed Res Int. 2021;2021:6612477.
- 66. Cassetta L, Baekkevold ES, Brandau S, Bujko A, Cassatella MA, Dorhoi A, et al. Deciphering myeloid-derived suppressor cells: isolation and markers in humans, mice and non-human primates. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2019;68:687 -97.
- 67. Seman BG, Robinson CM. The enigma of low-density granulocytes in humans: complexities in the characterization and function of LDGs during disease. Pathogens. 2021;10:1091.
- 68. Bongers SH, Chen N, van Grinsven E, van Staveren S, Hassani M, Spijkerman R, et al. Kinetics of neutrophil subsets in acute, subacute, and chronic in /uniFB02 ammation. Front Immunol. 2021;12:674079.
- 69. Xie X, Shi Q, Wu P, Zhang X, Kambara H, Su J, et al. Single-cell transcriptome pro /uniFB01 ling reveals neutrophil heterogeneity in homeostasis and infection. Nat Immunol. 2020;21:1119 -33.
- 70. Grieshaber-Bouyer R, Radtke FA, Cunin P, Stifano G, Levescot A, Vijaykumar B, et al. The neutrotime transcriptional signature de /uniFB01 nes a single continuum of neutrophils across biological compartments. Nat Commun. 2021;12:2856.
- 71. Younossi ZM, Golabi P, de Avila L, Paik JM, Srishord M, Fukui N, et al. The global epidemiology of NAFLD and NASH in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hepatol. 2019;71:793 -801.
- 72. Michailidou Z, Gomez-Salazar M, Alexaki VI. Innate immune cells in the adipose tissue in health and metabolic disease. J Innate Immun. 2022;14:4 -301.
- 73. Zheng Y, Ley SH, Hu FB. Global aetiology and epidemiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus and its complications. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2018;14:88 -98.
- 74. Ali M, Jasmin S, Fariduddin M, Alam S, Arslan MI, Biswas SK. Neutrophil elastase and myeloperoxidase mRNA expression in overweight and obese subjects. Mol Biol Rep. 2018;45:1245 -52.
- 75. Nijhuis J, Rensen SS, Slaats Y, van Dielen FM, Buurman WA, Greve JW. Neutrophil activation in morbid obesity, chronic activation of acute in /uniFB02 ammation. Obesity. 2009;17:2014 -8.

- 76. Wiersma JJ, Meuwese MC, van Miert JN, Kastelein A, Tijssen JG, Piek JJ, et al. Diabetes mellitus type 2 is associated with higher levels of myeloperoxidase. Med Sci Monit. 2008;14:406 -10.
- 77. Mansuy-Aubert V, Zhou QL, Xie X, Gong Z, Huang JY, Khan AR, et al. Imbalance between neutrophil elastase and its inhibitor α 1-antitrypsin in obesity alters insulin sensitivity, in /uniFB02 ammation, and energy expenditure. Cell Metab. 2013;17:534 -48.
- 78. Wang Q, Xie Z, Zhang W, Zhou J, Wu Y, Zhang M, et al. Myeloperoxidase deletion prevents high-fat diet -Induced obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes. 2014;63:4172 -85.
- 79. Talukdar S, Oh DY, Bandyopadhyay G, Li D, Xu J, McNelis J, et al. Neutrophils mediate insulin resistance in mice fed a high-fat diet through secreted elastase. Nat Med. 2012;18:1407 -12.
- 80. Elgazar-Carmon V, Rudich A, Hadad N, Levy R. Neutrophils transiently in /uniFB01 ltrate intra-abdominal fat early in the course of high-fat feeding. J Lipid Res. 2008;49:1894 -903.
- 81. Watanabe Y, Nagai Y, Honda H, Okamoto N, Yanagibashi T, Ogasawara M, et al. Bidirectional crosstalk between neutrophils and adipocytes promotes adipose tissue in /uniFB02 ammation. FASEB J. 2019;33:11821 -35.
- 82. Pahwa R, Modi P, Jialal I. Myeloperoxidase De /uniFB01 ciency. StatPearls . (2021).
- 83. Friedman SL, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Rinella M, Sanyal AJ. Mechanisms of NAFLD development and therapeutic strategies. Nat Med. 2018;24:908 -22.
- 84. Luci C, Bourinet M, Leclère PS, Anty R, Gual P. Chronic in /uniFB02 ammation in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: molecular mechanisms and therapeutic strategies. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2020;11:597648.
- 85. Antonucci L, Porcu C, Timperi E, Santini SJ, Iannucci G, Balsano C. Circulating neutrophils of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis patients show an activated phenotype and suppress T lymphocytes activity. J Immunol Res. 2020;2020:4570219.
- 86. Zhang Y, Zhou X, Liu P, Chen X, Zhang J, Zhang H, et al. GCSF de ciency /uniFB01 attenuates non-alcoholic fatty liver disease through regulating GCSFR-SOCS3JAK-STAT3 pathway and immune cells in /uniFB01 ltration. Am J Physiol Liver Physiol. 2021;320:G531 -42.
- 87. González-Terán B, Matesanz N, Nikolic I, Verdugo MA, Sreeramkumar V, Hernández-Cosido L, et al. p38 γ and p38 δ reprogram liver metabolism by modulating neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration. EMBO J. 2016;35:536 -52.
- 88. Hwang S, He Y, Xiang X, Seo W, Kim SJ, Ma J, et al. Interleukin-22 ameliorates neutrophil-driven nonalcoholic steatohepatitis through multiple targets. Hepatology. 2020;72:412 -29.
- 89. Ye D, Yang K, Zang S, Lin Z, Chau HT, Wang Y, et al. Lipocalin-2 mediates nonalcoholic steatohepatitis by promoting neutrophil-macrophage crosstalk via the induction of CXCR2. J Hepatol. 2016;65:988 -97.
- 90. Crespo M, Gonzalez-Teran B, Nikolic I, Mora A, Folgueira C, Rodríguez E, et al. Neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration regulates clock-gene expression to organize daily hepatic metabolism. Elife. 2020;9:1 -25.
- 91. Mirea AM, Toonen E, van den Munckhof I, Munsterman ID, Tjwa E, Jaeger M, et al. Increased proteinase 3 and neutrophil elastase plasma concentrations are associated with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and type 2 diabetes. Mol Med. 2019;25:1 -10.
- 92. Zang S, Ma X, Zhuang Z, Liu J, Bian D, Xun Y, et al. Increased ratio of neutrophil elastase to α 1-antitrypsin is closely associated with liver in /uniFB02 ammation in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Clin Exp Pharm Physiol. 2016;43:13 -21.
- 93. Toonen EJM, Mirea AM, Tack CJ, Stienstra R, Ballak DB, van Diepen JA, et al. Activation of proteinase 3 contributes to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and insulin resistance. Mol Med. 2016;22:202 -14.
- 94. Mirea AM, Stienstra R, Kanneganti TD, Tack CJ, Chavakis T, Toonen E, et al. Mice de cient in the IL-1 /uniFB01 β activation genes Prtn3, Elane, and Casp1 are protected against the development of obesity-induced NAFLD. In /uniFB02 ammation. 2020;43:1054 -64.
- 95. Chen J, Liang B, Bian D, Luo Y, Yang J, Li Z, et al. Knockout of neutrophil elastase protects against western diet induced nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in mice by regulating hepatic ceramides metabolism. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019;518:691 -7.
- 96. Zang S, Wang L, Ma X, Zhu G, Zhuang Z, Xun Y, et al. Neutrophils play a crucial role in the early stage of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis via neutrophil elastase in mice. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2015;73:479 -87.
- 97. He Y, Rodrigues RM, Wang X, Seo W, Ma J, Hwang S, et al. Neutrophil-to-hepatocyte communication via LDLR-dependent miR-223-enriched extracellular vesicle transfer ameliorates nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. J Clin Invest. 2021;131:e141513.
- 98. Rensen SS, Slaats Y, Nijhuis J, Jans A, Bieghs V, Driessen A, et al. Increased hepatic myeloperoxidase activity in obese subjects with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Am J Pathol. 2009;175:1473 -82.
- 99. Rensen SS, Bieghs V, Xanthoulea S, Ar /uniFB01 anti E, Bakker JA, Shiri-Sverdlov R, et al. Neutrophil-derived myeloperoxidase aggravates non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in low-density lipoprotein receptor-de /uniFB01 cient mice. PLoS One. 2012;7:e52411.
- 100. Pulli B, Ali M, Iwamoto Y, Zeller MW, Schob S, Linnoila JJ, et al. Myeloperoxidasehepatocyte-stellate cell cross talk promotes hepatocyte injury and /uniFB01 brosis in experimental nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015;23:1255 -69.

- 101. Du J, Zhang J, Chen X, Zhang S, Zhang C, Liu H, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps induced by pro-in /uniFB02 ammatory cytokines enhance procoagulant activity in NASH patients. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2021;46:101697.
- 102. Van der Windt DJ, Sud V, Zhang H, Varley PR, Goswami J, Yazdani HO, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps promote in /uniFB02 ammation and development of hepatocellular carcinoma in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepatology. 2018;68:1347 -60.
- 103. Ou R, Liu J, Lv M, Wang J, Wang J, Zhu L, et al. Neutrophil depletion improves diet-induced non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in mice. Endocrine. 2017;57:72 -82.
- 104. Roth GA, Mensah GA, Johnson CO, Addolorato G, Ammirati E, Baddour LM, et al. Global burden of cardiovascular diseases and risk factors, 1990 -2019: update From the GBD 2019 study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2982 -3021.
- 105. Hansson GK, Hermansson A. The immune system in atherosclerosis. Nat Immunol. 2011;12:204 -12.
- 106. Silvestre-Roig C, Braster Q, Ortega-Gomez A, Soehnlein O. Neutrophils as regulators of cardiovascular in /uniFB02 ammation. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2020;17:327 -40.
- 107. Soehnlein O, Steffens S, Hidalgo A, Weber C. Neutrophils as protagonists and targets in chronic in /uniFB02 ammation. Nat Rev Immunol. 2017;17:248 -61.
- 108. Soehnlein O, Libby P. Targeting in /uniFB02 ammation in atherosclerosis -from experimental insights to the clinic. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2021;20:589 -610.
- 109. Meir KS, Leitersdorf E. Atherosclerosis in the apolipoprotein E-de /uniFB01 cient mouse: a decade of progress. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2004;24:1006 -14.
- 110. Oppi S, Lüscher TF, Stein S. Mouse models for atherosclerosis research -which is my line? Front Cardiovasc Med. 2019;6:1 -8.
- 111. Getz GS, Reardon CA. Animal models of atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012;32:1104 -15.
- 112. Schumski A, Ortega-Gómez A, Wichapong K, Winter C, Lemnitzer P, Viola JR, et al. Endotoxinemia accelerates atherosclerosis through electrostatic chargemediated monocyte adhesion. Circulation. 2021;143:254 -66.
- 113. Shimonaga K, Matsushige T, Takahashi H, Hashimoto Y, Yoshiyama M, Ono C, et al. Peptidylarginine deiminase 4 as a possible biomarker of plaque instability in carotid artery stenosis. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2021;30:105816.
- 114. Zhou J, Chen R, Liu C, Zhou P, Li J, Wang Y, et al. Associations of NETs with in /uniFB02 ammatory risk and atherosclerotic severity in ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Thromb Res. 2021;203:5 -11.
- 115. Da Silva RF, Baptista D, Roth A, Miteva K, Burger F, Vuilleumier N, et al. Antiapolipoprotein a-1 igg in /uniFB02 uences neutrophil extracellular trap content at distinct regions of human carotid plaques. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21:1 -16.
- 116. Poznyak A, Grechko AV, Poggio P, Myasoedova VA, Al /uniFB01 eri V, Orekhov AN. The diabetes mellitus -atherosclerosis connection: the role of lipid and glucose metabolism and chronic in /uniFB02 ammation. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21:1835.
- 117. Chatzigeorgiou A, Mitroulis I, Chrysanthopoulou A, Legaki AI, Ritis K, Tentolouris N, et al. Increased neutrophil extracellular traps related to smoking intensity and subclinical atherosclerosis in patients with type 2 diabetes. Thromb Haemost. 2020;120:1587 -9.
- 118. Flynn MC, Kraakman MJ, Tikellis C, Lee M, Hanssen N, Kammoun HL, et al. Transient intermittent hyperglycemia accelerates atherosclerosis by promoting myelopoiesis. Circ Res. 2020;127:877 -92.
- 119. Josefs T, Barrett TJ, Brown EJ, Quezada A, Wu X, Voisin M, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps promote macrophage in /uniFB02 ammation and impair atherosclerosis resolution in diabetic mice. JCI Insight. 2020;5:e134796.
- 120. Gomez I, Ward B, Souilhol C, Recarti C, Ariaans M, Johnston J, et al. Neutrophil microvesicles drive atherosclerosis by delivering miR-155 to atheroprone endothelium. Nat Commun. 2020;11:1 -18.
- 121. Du F, Yu F, Wang Y, Hui Y, Carnevale K, Fu M, et al. MicroRNA-155 de /uniFB01 ciency results in decreased macrophage in /uniFB02 ammation and attenuated atherogenesis in apolipoprotein E-de /uniFB01 cient mice. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014;34:759 -67.
- 122. Ana B. Arroyo A, María P. Fernández-Pérez, Alberto del Monte, Sonia Águila, Raúl Méndez, Rebecca Hernández-Antolín, et al. miR-146a is a pivotal regulator of neutrophil extracellular trap formation promoting thrombosis. Haematologica. 2020;106:1636 -46.
- 123. Wang L, Wang FS, Gershwin ME. Human autoimmune diseases: a comprehensive update. J Intern Med. 2015;278:369 -95.
- 124. O'neil LJ, Kaplan MJ. Neutrophils in rheumatoid arthritis: breaking immune tolerance and fueling disease. Trends Mol Med. 2019;25:215 -27.
- 125. Woodberry T, Bouf /uniFB02 er S, Wilson A, Buckland R, Brüstle A. The emerging role of neutrophil granulocytes in multiple sclerosis. J Clin Med. 2018;7:511.
- 126. De Bondt M, Hellings N, Opdenakker G, Struyf S. Neutrophils: Underestimated players in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (ms). Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21:1 -25.
- 127. Tsai CY, Li KJ, Hsieh SC, Liao HT, Yu CL. What s wrong with neutrophils in lupus? ' Clin Exp Rheumatol 2019;37:684 -93.

128.

DiMeglio LA, Evans-Molina C, Oram RA. Type 1 diabetes. Lancet. 2018;391:2449

-

62.

- 129. Bluestone JA, Herold K, Eisenbarth G. Genetics, pathogenesis and clinical interventions in type 1 diabetes. Nature. 2010;464:1293 -300.

## 190

- 130. Pearson JA, Wong FS, Wen L. The importance of the Non Obese Diabetic (NOD) mouse model in autoimmune diabetes. J Autoimmun. 2016;66:76 -88.
- 131. Chen YG, Mathews CE, Driver JP. The role of NOD mice in type 1 diabetes research: lessons from the past and recommendations for the future. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2018;9:51.
- 132. Shu L, Zhong L, Xiao Y, Wu X, Liu Y, Jiang X, et al. Neutrophil elastase triggers the development of autoimmune diabetes by exacerbating innate immune responses in pancreatic islets of non-obese diabetic mice. Clin Sci. 2020;134:1679 -96.
- 133. Diana J, Lehuen A. Macrophages and β -cells are responsible for CXCR2 medi--ated neutrophil in /uniFB01 ltration of the pancreas during autoimmune diabetes. EMBO Mol Med. 2014;6:1090 -104.
- 134. Njeim R, Azar WS, Fares AH, Azar ST, Kfoury Kassouf H, Eid AA. Netosis contributes to the pathogenesis of diabetes and its complications. J Mol Endocrinol. 2020;65:R65 -76.
- 135. Sodré FMC, Bissenova S, Bruggeman Y, Tilvawala R, Cook DP, Berthault C, et al. Peptidylarginine deiminase inhibition prevents diabetes development in nod mice. Diabetes. 2021;70:516 -28.
- 136. Liang Y, Wang X, He D, You Q, Zhang T, Dong W, et al. Ameliorating gut microenvironment through staphylococcal nuclease-mediated intestinal NETs degradation for prevention of type 1 diabetes in NOD mice. Life Sci. 2019;221:301 -10.
- 137. Wong SL, Demers M, Martinod K, Gallant M, Wang Y, Gold /uniFB01 ne AB, et al. Diabetes primes neutrophils to undergo NETosis, which impairs wound healing. Nat Med. 2015;21:815 -9.
- 138. Parackova Z, Zentsova I, Vrabcova P, Klocperk A, Sumnik Z, Pruhova S, et al. Neutrophil extracellular trap induced dendritic cell activation leads to Th1 polarization in type 1 diabetes. Front Immunol. 2020;11:1 -9.
- 139. Harsunen MH, Puff R, D'Orlando O, Giannopoulou E, Lachmann L, Beyerlein A, et al. Reduced blood leukocyte and neutrophil numbers in the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. Horm Metab Res. 2013;45:467 -70.
- 140. Klocperk A, Petruzelkova L, Pavlikova M, Rataj M, Kayserova J, Pruhova S, et al. Changes in innate and adaptive immunity over the /uniFB01 rst year after the onset of type 1 diabetes. Acta Diabetol. 2020;57:297 -307.
- 141. Valle A, Giamporcaro GM, Scavini M, Stabilini A, Grogan P, Bianconi E, et al. Reduction of circulating neutrophils precedes and accompanies type 1 diabetes. Diabetes. 2013;62:2072 -7.
- 142. Vecchio F, Lo Buono N, Stabilini A, Nigi L, Dufort MJ, Geyer S, et al. Abnormal neutrophil signature in the blood and pancreas of presymptomatic and symptomatic type 1 diabetes. JCI Insight. 2018;3:e122146.
- 143. Qin J, Fu S, Speake C, Greenbaum CJ, Odegard JM. NETosis-associated serum biomarkers are reduced in type 1 diabetes in association with neutrophil count. Clin Exp Immunol. 2016;184:318 -22.
- 144. Dufort MJ, Greenbaum CJ, Speake C, Linsley PS. Cell type-speci /uniFB01 c immune phenotypes predict loss of insulin secretion in new-onset type 1 diabetes. JCI insight. 2019;4:e125556.
- 145. You Q, He DM, Shu GF, Cao B, Xia YQ, Xing Y, et al. Increased formation of neutrophil extracellular traps is associated with gut leakage in patients with type 1 but not type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes. 2019;11:665 -73.
- 146. Wang Y, Xiao Y, Zhong L, Ye D, Zhang J, Tu Y, et al. Increased neutrophil elastase and proteinase 3 and augmented NETosis are closely associated with β -cell autoimmunity in patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes. 2014;63:4239 -48.
- 147. Zhang YZ, Li YY. In /uniFB02 ammatory bowel disease: pathogenesis. World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:91 -9.
- 148. Chassaing B, Aitken JD, Malleshappa M, Vijay-Kumar M. Dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in mice. Curr Protoc Immunol. 2014;104:15.25.1 -15.25.14.
- 149. Mizoguchi A. Animal models of in /uniFB02 ammatory bowel disease. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2012;105:263 -320.
- 150. Dinallo V, Mara /uniFB01 ni I, Di Fusco D, Laudisi F, Franzè E, Di Grazia A, et al. Neutrophil extracellulartraps sustain in /uniFB02 ammatory signals in ulcerative colitis. J Crohn s ' Colitis. 2019;13:772 -84.
- 151. Zhang T, Jiang J, Liu J, Xu L, Duan S, Sun L, et al. MK2 is required for neutrophilderived ROS production and in /uniFB02 ammatory bowel disease. Front Med. 2020;7:207.
- 152. Lin J, Li G, Xu C, Lu H, Zhang C, Pang Z, et al. Monocyte chemotactic protein 1-induced protein 1 is highly expressed in in /uniFB02 ammatory bowel disease and negatively regulates neutrophil activities. Mediators In /uniFB02 amm. 2020;2020:8812020.
- 153. Tecchio C, Micheletti A, Cassatella MA. Neutrophil-derived cytokines: facts beyond expression. Front Immunol. 2014;5:508.
- 154. Sachs UJ, Andrei-Selmer CL, Maniar A, Weiss T, Paddock C, Orlova VV, et al. The neutrophil-speci /uniFB01 c antigen CD177 is a counter-receptor for platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (CD31). J Biol Chem. 2007;282:23603 -12.
- 155. Zhou G, Yu L, Fang L, Yang W, Yu T, Miao Y, et al. CD177 + neutrophils as functionally activated neutrophils negatively regulate IBD. Gut. 2018;67:1052 -63.
- 156. Seo DH, Che X, Kim S, Kim DH, Ma HW, Kim JH, et al. Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 agonist regulates intestinal in /uniFB02 ammation via Cd177 + neutrophils. Front Immunol. 2021;12:650864.
- 157. Chen F, Yang W, Huang X, Cao AT, Bilotta AJ, Xiao Y, et al. Neutrophils promote amphiregulin production in intestinal epithelial cells through TGFβ and contribute to intestinal homeostasis. J Immunol. 2018;201:2492 -501.
- 158. Zindl CL, Lai JF, Lee YK, Maynard CL, Harbour SN, Ouyang W, et al. IL-22-producing neutrophils contribute to antimicrobial defense and restitution of colonic epithelial integrity during colitis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013;110:12768 -73.
- 159. Kühl AA, Kakirman H, Janotta M, Dreher S, Cremer P, Pawlowski NN, et al. Aggravation of different types of experimental colitis by depletion or adhesion blockade of neutrophils. Gastroenterology. 2007;133:1882 -92.
- 160. Wéra O, Lancellotti P, Oury C. The dual role of neutrophils in in /uniFB02 ammatory bowel diseases. J Clin Med. 2016;5:118.
- 161. Hoenderdos K, Condliffe A. The neutrophil in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: too little, too late or too much, too soon? [Internet]. Vol. 48, American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology. American Thoracic Society; p. 531 9 2013. -
- 162. Trivedi A, Khan MA, Bade G, Talwar A. Orchestration of neutrophil extracellular traps (Nets), a unique innate immune function during chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) development. Biomedicines. 2021;9:1 -25.
- 163. Ghorani V, Boskabady MH, Khazdair MR, Kianmeher M. Experimental animal models for COPD: a methodological review. Tob Induc Dis 2017 151. 2017;15:1 -13.
- 164. Vandivier RW, Ghosh M. Understanding the relevance of the mouse cigarette smoke model of COPD: Peering through the smoke. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2017;57:3 -4.
- 165. Serban KA, Petrache I. Mouse models of COPD. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1809:379 -94.
- 166. Richens TR, Linderman DJ, Horstmann SA, Lambert C, Xiao YQ, Keith RL, et al. Cigarette smoke impairs clearance of apoptotic cells through oxidantdependent activation of RhoA. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009;179:1011 -21.
- 167. Guzik K, Skret J, Smagur J, Bzowska M, Gajkowska B, Scott DA, et al. Cigarette smoke-exposed neutrophils die unconventionally but are rapidly phagocytosed by macrophages. Cell Death Dis. 2011;2:e131.
- 168. St ă nescu D, Sanna A, Veriter C, Kostianev S, Calcagni PG, Fabbri LM, et al. Airways obstruction, chronic expectoration, and rapid decline of FEV1 in smokers are associated with increased levels of sputum neutrophils. Thorax. 1996;51:267 -71.
- 169. O'donnell RA, Peebles C, Ward JA, Daraker A, Angco G, Broberg P, et al. Relationship between peripheral airway dysfunction, airway obstruction, and neutrophilic in /uniFB02 ammation in COPD. Thorax. 2004;59:837 -42.
- 170. Yu J. In /uniFB02 ammatory mechanisms in the lung. J In /uniFB02 amm Res. 2008;2:1.
- 171. Beeh KM, Kornmann O, Buhl R, Culpitt SV, Giembycz MA, Barnes PJ. Neutrophil chemotactic activity of sputum from patients with COPD: Role of interleukin 8 and leukotriene B4. Chest. 2003;123:1240 -7.
- 172. Knabe L, Petit A, Vernisse C, Charriot J, Pugnière M, Henriquet C, et al. CCSP counterbalances airway epithelial-driven neutrophilic chemotaxis. Eur Respir J. 2019;54:1802408.
- 173. Rennard SI, Dale DC, Donohue JF, Kanniess F, Magnussen H, Sutherland ER, et al. CXCR2 antagonist MK-7123 a phase 2 proof-of-concept trial for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015;191:1001 -11.
- 174. Zemans RL, Briones N, Campbell M, McClendon J, Young SK, Suzuki T, et al. Neutrophil transmigration triggers repair of the lung epithelium via β -catenin signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011;108:15990 -5.
- 175. Crosby LM, Waters CM. Epithelial repair mechanisms in the lung. Am J Physiol -Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010;298:715 -31.
- 176. Moore MW, Herzog EL. Regulation and relevance of myo /uniFB01 broblast responses in idiopathic pulmonary /uniFB01 brosis. Curr Pathobiol Rep. 2013;1:199 -208.
- 177. Gregory AD, Kliment CR, Metz HE, Kim KH, Kargl J, Agostini BA, et al. Neutrophil elastase promotes myo /uniFB01 broblast differentiation in lung /uniFB01 brosis. J Leukoc Biol. 2015;98:143 -52.
- 178. Chrysanthopoulou A, Mitroulis I, Apostolidou E, Arelaki S, Mikroulis D, Konstantinidis T, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps promote differentiation and function of /uniFB01 broblasts. J Pathol. 2014;233:294 -307.
- 179. Dicker AJ, Crichton ML, Pumphrey EG, Cassidy AJ, Suarez-Cuartin G, Sibila O, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps are associated with disease severity and microbiota diversity in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018;141:117 -27.
- 180. Winslow S, Odqvist L, Diver S, Riise R, Abdillahi S, Wingren C, et al. Multi-omics links IL-6 trans-signalling with neutrophil extracellular trap formation and Haemophilus infection in COPD. Eur Respir J. 2021;58:2003312.
- 181. Lonergan M, Dicker AJ, Crichton ML, Keir HR, Van Dyke MK, Mullerova H, et al. Blood neutrophil counts are associated with exacerbation frequency and mortality in COPD. Respir Res. 2020;21:166.
- 182. Thulborn SJ, Mistry V, Brightling CE, Mof /uniFB01 tt KL, Ribeiro D, Bafadhel M. Neutrophil elastase as a biomarker for bacterial infection in COPD. Respir Res. 2019;20:170.
- 183. Hao W, Li M, Zhang Y, Zhang C, Xue Y. Expressions of MMP-12, TIMP-4, and neutrophil elastase in PBMCs and exhaled breath condensate in patients with COPD and their relationships with disease severity and acute exacerbations. J Immunol Res. 2019;2019:7142438.

- 184. Zhu A, Ge D, Zhang J, Teng Y, Yuan C, Huang M, et al. Sputum myeloperoxidase in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur J Med Res. 2014;19:12.
- 185. Churg A, Marshall CV, Sin DD, Bolton S, Zhou S, Thain K, et al. Late intervention with a myeloperoxidase inhibitor stops progression of experimental chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012;185:34 -43.
- 186. Bchir S, Nasr HB, Bouchet S, Benzarti M, Garrouch A, Tabka Z, et al. Concomitant elevations of MMP-9, NGAL, proMMP-9/NGAL and neutrophil elastase in serum of smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Cell Mol Med. 2017;21:1280 -91.
- 187. Soni S, Garner JL, O'Dea KP, Koh M, Finney L, Tirlapur N, et al. Intra-alveolar neutrophil-derived microvesicles are associated with disease severity in COPD. Am J Physiol -Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2021;320:L73 -83.
- 188. Guillon A, Jouan Y, Brea D, Gueugnon F, Dalloneau E, Baranek T, et al. Neutrophil proteases alter the interleukin-22-receptor-dependent lung antimicrobial defence. Eur Respir J. 2015;46:771 -82.
- 189. Alam MJ, Xie L, Ang C, Fahimi F, Willingham SB, Kueh AJ, et al. Therapeutic blockade of CXCR2 rapidly clears in /uniFB02 ammation in arthritis and atopic dermatitis models: demonstration with surrogate and humanized antibodies. MAbs. 2020;12:1856460.
- 190. Lazaar AL, Miller BE, Donald AC, Keeley T, Ambery C, Russell J, et al. CXCR2 antagonist for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with chronic mucus hypersecretion: a phase 2b trial. Respir Res. 2020;21:149.
- 191. Tourki B, Kain V, Pullen AB, Norris PC, Patel N, Arora P, et al. Lack of resolution sensor drives age-related cardiometabolic and cardiorenal defects and impedes in /uniFB02 ammation-resolution in heart failure. Mol Metab. 2020;31:138 -49.
- 192. El Kebir D, Gjorstrup P, Filep JG. Resolvin E1 promotes phagocytosis-induced neutrophil apoptosis and accelerates resolution of pulmonary in /uniFB02 ammation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012;109:14983 -8.
- 193. López-Vicario C, Rius B, Alcaraz-Quiles J, González-Périz A, Martínez-Puchol AI, Casulleras M, et al. Association of a variant in the gene encoding for ERV1/ ChemR23 with reduced in /uniFB02 ammation in visceral adipose tissue from morbidly obese individuals. Sci Rep. 2017;7:15724.
- 194. Barden A, Shinde S, Tsai IJ, Croft KD, Beilin LJ, Puddey IB, et al. Effect of weight loss on neutrophil resolvins in the metabolic syndrome. Prostaglandins Leukot Ess Fat Acids. 2019;148:25 -9.
- 195. Pal A, Al-Shaer AE, Guesdon W, Torres MJ, Armstrong M, Quinn K, et al. Resolvin E1 derived from eicosapentaenoic acid prevents hyperinsulinemia and hyperglycemia in a host genetic manner. FASEB J. 2020;34:10640 -56.
- 196. Laguna-Fernandez A, Checa A, Carracedo M, Artiach G, Petri MH, Baumgartner R, et al. ERV1/ChemR23 signaling protects against atherosclerosis by modifying oxidized low-density lipoprotein uptake and Phagocytosis in macrophages. Circulation. 2018;138:1693 -705.
- 197. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Miller M, Brinton EA, Jacobson TA, Ketchum SB, et al. Cardiovascular Risk Reduction with Icosapent Ethyl for Hypertriglyceridemia. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:11 -22.
- 198. Aung T, Halsey J, Kromhout D, Gerstein HC, Marchioli R, Tavazzi L, et al. Associations of omega-3 fatty acid supplement use with cardiovascular disease risks metaanalysis of 10 trials involving 77 917 individuals. JAMA Cardiol. 2018;3:225 -34.
- 199. Tsai CY, Hsieh SC, Liu CW, Lu CS, Wu CH, Liao HT, et al. Cross talk -among polymorphonuclear neutrophils, immune, and non immune cells via released -cytokines, granule proteins, microvesicles, and neutrophil extracellular trap formation: a novel concept of biology and pathobiology for neutrophils. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22:1 -28.
- 200. Aroca-Crevillén A, Adrover JM, Hidalgo A. Circadian features of neutrophil biology. Front Immunol. 2020;11:576.
- 201. Winter C, Silvestre-Roig C, Ortega-Gomez A, Lemnitzer P, Poelman H, Schumski A, et al. Chrono-pharmacological targeting of the CCL2-CCR2 axis ameliorates atherosclerosis. Cell Metab. 2018;28:175 -.e5.
- 202. Molinaro R, Yu M, Sausen G, Bichsel CA, Corbo C, Folco EJ, et al. Targeted delivery of Protein Arginine Deiminase-4 inhibitors to limit arterial intimal NETosis and preserve endothelial integrity. Cardiovasc Res. 2021;117:2652 -63.
- 203. Li C, Zhao Y, Cheng J, Guo J, Zhang Q, Zhang X, et al. A proresolving peptide nanotherapy for site-speci /uniFB01 c treatment of in /uniFB02 ammatory bowel disease by regulating proin /uniFB02 ammatory microenvironment and gut microbiota. Adv Sci. 2019;6:1900610.
- 204. Everett BM, MacFadyen JG, Thuren T, Libby P, Glynn RJ, Ridker PM. Inhibition of interleukin-1 β and reduction in atherothrombotic cardiovascular events in the CANTOS trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:1660 -70.

- 205. Ridker PM, Everett BM, Thuren T, MacFadyen JG, Chang WH, Ballantyne C, et al. Antiin /uniFB02 ammatory therapy with canakinumab for atherosclerotic disease. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:1119 -31.
- 206. Lang J, Wang X, Liu K, He D, Niu P, Cao R, et al. Oral delivery of staphylococcal nuclease by Lactococcus lactis prevents type 1 diabetes mellitus in NOD mice. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2017;101:7653 -62.
- 207. Dong W, Liu D, Zhang T, You Q, Huang F, Wu J. Oral delivery of staphylococcal nuclease ameliorates DSS induced ulcerative colitis in mice via degrading intestinal neutrophil extracellular traps. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2021;215:112161.
- 208. Silvestre-Roig C, Braster Q, Wichapong K, Lee EY, Teulon JM, Berrebeh N, et al. Externalized histone H4 orchestrates chronic in /uniFB02 ammation by inducing lytic cell death. Nature. 2019;569:236 -40.
- 209. Franck G, Mawson TL, Folco EJ, Molinaro R, Ruvkun V, Engelbertsen D, et al. Roles of PAD4 and netosis in experimental atherosclerosis and arterial injury implications for superfcial erosion. Circ Res. 2018;123:33 -42.
- 210. Knight JS, Luo W, O'Dell AA, Yalavarthi S, Zhao W, Subramanian V, et al. Peptidylarginine deiminase inhibition reduces vascular damage and modulates innate immune responses in murine models of atherosclerosis. Circ Res. 2014;114:947 -56.
- 211. Chirivi RGS, van Rosmalen J, van der Linden M, Euler M, Schmets G, Bogatkevich G, et al. Therapeutic ACPA inhibits NET formation: a potential therapy for neutrophilmediated in /uniFB02 ammatory diseases. Cell Mol Immunol. 2021;18:1528 -44.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

OS receives funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB914 TP B8, SFB1123 TP A6, TP B5, SFB 1009 TP A13), the Vetenskapsrådet (2017 -01762), the ElseKröner-Fresenius Stiftung, the Swedish Heart -Lung Foundation, and the Leducq Foundation. Figures were created using Biorender.com.

## FUNDING

Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

## COMPETING INTERESTS

OS received funding from Novo Nordisk to study the potential of chronopharmacology in chronic in /uniFB02 ammation. OS is an inventor of three patents targeting chemokines and histones in in /uniFB02 ammation.

## ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Andrea Herrero-Cervera.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/ reprints

<!-- image -->

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,

adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article s Creative Commons license, unless ' indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory ' regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons. org/licenses/by/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2022