Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012. 30:459-89

First published online as a Review in Advance on January 3, 2012

The Annual Review of Immunology is online at immunol.annualreviews.org

This article's doi:

10.1146/annurev-immunol-020711-074942

Copyright c © 2012 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved

0732-0582/12/0423-0459$20.00

- ∗ All authors contributed equally to the work and are listed alphabetically.

## Neutrophil Function: From Mechanisms to Disease

## Borko Amulic, Christel Cazalet, Garret L. Hayes, Kathleen D. Metzler, and Arturo Zychlinsky ∗

Department of Cellular Microbiology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Charit' eplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany; email: amulic@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de, cazalet@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de, hayes@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de, metzler@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de, zychlinsky@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de

## Keywords

inflammation, antimicrobial, granule, phagocytosis, NET

## Abstract

Neutrophils are the most abundant white blood cells in circulation, and patients with congenital neutrophil deficiencies suffer from severe infections that are often fatal, underscoring the importance of these cells in immune defense. In spite of neutrophils' relevance in immunity, research on these cells has been hampered by their experimentally intractable nature. Here, we present a survey of basic neutrophil biology, with an emphasis on examples that highlight the function of neutrophils not only as professional killers, but also as instructors of the immune system in the context of infection and inflammatory disease. We focus on emerging issues in the field of neutrophil biology, address questions in this area that remain unanswered, and critically examine the experimental basis for common assumptions found in neutrophil literature.

## INTRODUCTION

In the late nineteenth century, Paul Ehrlich, dissatisfied with what he considered an inexcusable disinterest in the white blood cell, began to utilize newly developed cell-staining techniques to examine subpopulations of leukocytes. His experimentation led to a new appreciation for the heterogeneity of white blood cells and to the discovery of several novel leukocyte subpopulations. Ehrlich named one of these newly discovered cell types, characterized by a 'polymorphous nucleus' and a tendency to retain neutral dyes, the 'neutrophil' (1) (see also the sidebar, A Natural History of Neutrophils).

The function of neutrophils was initially shrouded in considerable mystery; their conspicuous presence during infections led several researchers to arrive hastily at a rather ironic conclusion: They surmised that neutrophils promote infection, serving as cellular shuttles for bacteria (2). Their actual function, that of antimicrobial actors in the immune response, was eventually demonstrated conclusively by a contemporary of Ehrlich, Elie Metchnikoff, an

## A NATURAL HISTORY OF NEUTROPHILS

Phagocytes are ancient cells that evolved to allow multicellular organisms to thrive in the face of constant competition with microbes for resources. Metchnikoff's seminal theory of cellular immunity was based on comparative embryology and observations of phagocytes in various simple organisms, including the microscopic crustacean Daphnia. Remarkably, even the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum has phagocytic cells that protect it from infection (200). The short-lived neutrophil with a lobulated nucleus and granule-packed cytoplasm is a more recent evolutionary adaptation. In insects, phagocytes are long lived and have round nuclei. They do, however, produce hydrogen peroxide and carry distinct classes of granules (201). Bony fish and frogs have bona fide neutrophils that are functionally similar to mammalian ones (202, 203). In both zebrafish and rodents, neutrophils are less abundant than in humans, comprising only 15-20% of immune cells. In chimpanzees, neutrophils account for more than 50% of the differential blood count (204).

early and enthusiastic evolutionary biologist interested in the phagocytic capacity of cells.

Metchnikoff demonstrated that injury of starfish embryos resulted in recruitment of phagocytic cells to the site of injury (3). He theorized (correctly) that these cells migrate to injured sites and participate in microbe digestion. Remarkably, this prescient view of neutrophil action still aptly summarizes, more than a century later, the basic role of neutrophils in immunity. The uniquely lobulated nucleus of the neutrophil also inspired Metchnikoff to rename these cells: He called them polymorphonuclear leukocytes (or PMNs), a title that still enjoys frequent use and that is used interchangeably with neutrophil throughout this review. Together with two other developmentally related cell types, the eosinophils and basophils (also discovered by Ehrlich), PMNs form the granulocyte family of white blood cells, a family whose hallmark is the presence of 'granules,' unique storage structures important in antimicrobial functions (see section on Granules and Degranulation, below).

Neutrophils were discovered at the dawn of the immunological sciences; consequently, elucidation of their role in the immune response has been an ongoing process stretching over more than a century. We now know that they are key components of the innate immune response and vital in immune function; unfortunately, their importance has often been overshadowed by breakthroughs in the study of the adaptive immune response (4). Admittedly, this situation is exacerbated by neutrophils' notorious experimental intractability: They exhibit a short life span and are terminally differentiated, preventing growth in tissue culture. The standard tools of molecular biology, such as transfection and RNA interference, are of little use when applied to these cells, and immortalized 'neutrophil-like' cell lines rarely reflect the functional diversification of neutrophils. Furthermore, neutrophil-like cells studied in the isolation of a culture dish most certainly do not mimic the complex biological reality in tissues or circulation. Conclusions from in vitro studies should, therefore, be carefully interpreted.

Unfortunately, in vivo studies of neutrophil function also raise concerns. Mouse neutrophils, the preferred model for in vivo studies, differ in important aspects from their human equivalents. This is perhaps best exemplified by the differences in the respective antimicrobial repertoires and the numbers of PMNs in circulation (30% versus 70% in mice and humans, respectively).

Despite these difficulties, no picture of the immune response can be complete without a comprehensive understanding of the neutrophil and its functions. The extensive nature of neutrophil research, however, precludes a comprehensive review of the subject matter. In this review, we intend to provide a survey of basic neutrophil biology and function, while emphasizing recent advances in neutrophil research and providing a critical assessment of some current reports on PMN action.

Our survey of the neutrophil begins in adult bone marrow where, under the instruction of growth factors and cytokines, pluripotent hematopoietic cells differentiate into myeloblasts, a developmental cell type committed to becoming granulocytes. As these precursor cells mature to neutrophils, they synthesize proteins that are sorted into different granules (5). Traditionally, granules have been subdivided into three different classes based on their resident cargo molecules: azurophilic, specific, and gelatinase granules. Although this subdivision is practical, these designations are largely artificial. Granules are formed through a continuous process; vesicles bud from the Golgi apparatus and fuse, producing granular structures. The content of these structures is dictated by the transcriptional program active at the time of their formation. As the maturing neutrophil sequentially alters its transcriptional profile, granule content changes, resulting in a continuum of granule species with overlapping cargoes (6).

The release of neutrophils from the bone marrow is tightly regulated in healthy individuals: Chemokines control the passage of PMNs into circulation and maintain a pool of cells ready for release in case of

infection. Indeed, the number of neutrophils drastically increases during infection and some diseases. Interestingly, neutrophils circulate for only approximately 6-8 h and are among the shortest-lived cells in the human body. Althoughthereasonforthisshort life is unclear, it may ensure neutrophil integrity; this hypothesis is bolstered by observations that apoptosis prevents the release of noxious molecules. Still, the question of why evolution opted for eliminating neutrophils quickly as opposed to reducing leakage of their dangerous cargo remains an unanswered and intriguing mystery.

Mature neutrophils emerge from the bone marrow intent on pursuing one simple, yet essential, question: Has host integrity been compromised by potentially harmful invaders? Should the answer prove to be 'yes,' the neutrophil must swiftly enact a carefully choreographed process to locate, attack, and destroy the potential threat. At its disposal is an impressive arsenal of antimicrobial weapons that are deadly, indiscriminate, and brutish in their application. Although effective in their destructive capacity, these weapons can prove to be just as dangerous to the host cells as to their intended targets, the microbial invaders. Therefore, their deployment must be executed with exquisite precision and timing, at locations where they are both contained and effective.

How then does the neutrophil locate and identify infections? How does it transition at the correct time and place from an inactive cellular bystander to a fully activated microbial killing machine? This transition process, during which the neutrophil integrates a complex barrage of environmental cues and translates them into specific actions, is known as neutrophil 'activation.' As it pursues microbes, the neutrophil will enact an impressive multitude of cellular mechanisms: It will mobilize secretory vesicles and granules, identify chemotactic gradients and traverse them through destruction and reorganization of the actin skeleton, penetrate the endothelial barrier and navigate a course through the basement membrane, and begin transcription of cytokines for recruitment of new immune

Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:459-489. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Kansas on 01/22/19. For personal use only.

## Selectins:

transmembrane glycoproteins that mediate cell adhesion via binding to sugar moieties

## Integrins:

transmembrane receptors that mediate attachment to the extracellular matrix, as well as direct cell-cell interaction and signaling

Oxidative/respiratory burst: a rapid increase in oxygen consumption upon neutrophil activation due to production of ROS by the NADPH oxidase

cells. Ultimately, upon arriving at the infection site, it will seek the insulting pathogens and unleash its extensive arsenal of antimicrobial weapons. The initiation of these processes occurs in the bloodstream, where the neutrophil acts as a monitor for host distress, patrolling vessels and vigilantly seeking out indications of an incipient inflammatory response.

## NEUTROPHIL ACTIVATION

At inflammatory sites, bacterial-derived and host-produced inflammatory signals are abundant; these compounds stimulate the endothelial cells near the inflammatory site. These stimulants, such as the bacterial-derived lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and fMLP, as well as the classical chemoattractants and cytokines tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α , interleukin (IL)-1 β , and IL-17, prompt endothelial cells to produce adhesion molecules on their luminal side: the P-selectins, E-selectins, and several members of the integrin superfamily, the ICAMs (5). As neutrophils traverse the circulatory system, they continuously and randomly probe the vessel wall; the postcapillary venules, where flow dynamics and the constricted space are particularly amenable to increased random probing, are often the best-suited location for neutrophils to encounter the stimulated endothelial cells (7, 8).

Onthe surface of neutrophils, two constitutively expressed proteins are critical for recognition of the endothelial inflammatory signals: the glycoprotein P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) and L-selectin (9, 10). Upon random contact with the endothelium, these molecules engage the Pand E-selectins of endothelial cells, resulting in selectin-mediated tethering of neutrophils to the vessel wall. This is followed by a characteristic 'rolling' of neutrophils along the endothelium. It is here that the complex activation cascade begins and the neutrophil commitment to microbial killing commences. What changes occur in the neutrophil at this early time point? The engagement of PSGL-1 and L-selectin on neutrophils activates a variety of kinases, including Src

family kinases, Syk, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (11-13). This cascade initiates a number of changes in neutrophil biology and sets the stage for integrin activation and firm adhesion.

After selectin-mediated rolling, neutrophils enter a 'firm adhesion' state mediated by the β 2 integrin family of proteins (LFA-1 and Mac-1 proteins on the neutrophil); firm adhesion is characterized by the arrest of neutrophil rolling in preparation for transendothelial migration (13, 14). As the neutrophil rolls along the endothelium, interaction with selectins, chemoattractants, cytokines, and bacterial products results in activation and clustering of the β 2 integrins on the surface of the neutrophil (15, 16). The β 2 integrins then engage their endothelial ligands, members of the ICAM-1 immunoglobulin superfamily, resulting in arrest of neutrophil rolling and firm adhesion. This integrin engagement, as well as continuing input from inflammatory chemoattractants and cytokines, prepares the neutrophil for its final chemotactic pursuit: The cell spreads, producing a leading-edge lamellipodium where chemokine and phagocytic receptors are concentrated, the cytoskeleton is rebuilt and targeted toward movement along chemotactic gradients, and initiation of the neutrophil oxidative burst begins (17, 18).

Now firmly adhered, the neutrophil must negotiate a path through the endothelium into the underlying tissue. In a process dependent on β 2 integrins and ICAMs, neutrophils crawl along the vessel wall until a preferred site of transmigration is reached (19-21). Upon arrival at an endothelial cell junction, a complex interaction between ( a ) the neutrophil integrins and their endothelial partners and ( b ) neutrophil surface proteins and various endothelial junction molecules results in transmigration through the endothelial junction (13). Once through the endothelial lining, the neutrophil must navigate the basement membrane, a protein mesh consisting largely of laminins and collagen type IV. Speculation abounds that granule proteases assist in this migration by digesting the protein mesh

subsequent to degranulation; however, conclusive experimental evidence for this is lacking.

Once the endothelial barrier has been traversed, the neutrophil finds itself in a much different inflammatory milieu: Here, the environment is awash in a soup of chemoattractants and inflammatory stimulants, both host derived and of pathogenic origin. These compounds will now be the primary dictators of neutrophil behavior and assume responsibility for initiating the concluding steps of neutrophil activation. In the interstitial space, the neutrophil follows chemotactic gradients toward the invading microbes, pursuing hostproduced cytokines (e.g., IL-8) and, in parallel, pathogen-derived chemoattractants (e.g., fMLP). During this process, these chemoattractants bind to their respective neutrophil receptors (often G protein-coupled receptors, as is the case with the fMLP receptor FPR1 or the chemokine receptors), which initiate a signaling cascade dominated by the MAPK/ERK pathway (22, 23). Downstream molecules prompt assembly of the oxidative burst machinery, a hallmark of neutrophil activation. Furthermore, the stimulation of FPR1 triggers the release of ATP, whose autocrine action through activation of purinergic receptors is critical for the initiation of effective functional responses in neutrophils (24). Concomitantly, a family of molecules, the pattern-recognition receptors, is activated through recognition of specific nonself patterns present on many microbes (25). Perhaps the best-known example of this family is the Toll-like receptors (TLRs); they are responsible for recognizing a number of pathogen-derived compounds, collectively called pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), including LPS (TLR4), bacterial lipopeptides (TLR2), flagellin (TLR5), and DNA (TLR9). In neutrophils, all but one of these receptors (TLR3) are constitutively expressed, and their stimulation contributes to further activation, e.g., induction of the oxidative burst (25, 26). As the neutrophil nears its target, continued activation by chemoattractants further stimulates the oxidative response and degranulation. Upon finally reaching a

point of high chemoattractant concentration, where no discernible gradient exists, the neutrophil halts and begins the final release of its antimicrobial arsenal; the neutrophil is now fully in an antimicrobial attack state.

The complex signaling cascade leading to final neutrophil activation has several facets worthy of note. The movement to ever-higher concentrations of chemoattractant is key in this process, as individual chemoattractants may have very different effects on neutrophil physiology at different concentrations, a phenomenon exemplified by one of the key neutrophil-recruiting chemokines and activators, IL-8. At low concentrations, IL-8 stimulates L-selectin shedding and increased expression of β 2 integrins; slightly higher concentrations result in initiation of the oxidative burst. At the highest concentrations, IL-8 induces degranulation of neutrophils (27). In addition, many chemoattractant molecules exert a 'priming' effect. That is, alone they stimulate the oxidative response only mildly, but they dramatically enhance the subsequent response to other stimuli. A notable example of this phenomenon is the strong priming effect of LPS on the fMLP response (28). In this case, exposure of the neutrophil to LPS induces assembly of the NADPH oxidase machinery on the membrane; fMLP stimulation then induces activation of this machinery (29). In contrast to receptor priming, another critical feature of the stimulation process is the desensitization to previously encountered ligands. Stimulation of the neutrophil by a chemoattractant often results in endocytosis of the corresponding receptor, thus leading to a desensitization of the neutrophil to repeated stimulation with the same molecule (30, 31). The rich and varied input received by a neutrophil during this final leg of the activation process is complex, and the exact effects of priming, desensitization, and signaling are incompletely understood. Regardless, the end result of this signaling cacophony is unambiguous: The neutrophil begins to implement its regime of microbial killing, executing programs of phagocytosis, degranulation, and NETosis (i.e., the process of setting neutrophil

extracellular traps) (see the section on Neutrophils and the Elimination of Microbes, below).

The initiation of these microbicidal actions indicates the final stage of the neutrophil's journey through the activation process. However, a prominent question remains largely unanswered by the preceding exposition: What exactly is meant by the (admittedly ambiguous) phrase 'neutrophil activation'? A quick scan of the literature presents the inexperienced reader with a sometimes rather conflicting (and overwhelming) view of neutrophil activation. In fact, one could be (erroneously) led to believe that neutrophil activation refers only to direct stimulation of the oxidative burst, as this has been the canonical in vitro activation assay for decades. This is, however, an oversimplified view of a complex process. The myriad interactions that occur during a neutrophil's journey toward an inflammatory site must be

parsed by the complex neutrophilic signaling mechanisms, a process that gradually leads to complete activation and culminates in the premiere killing functions of phagocytosis, degranulation, and NETosis. It is, therefore, more insightful to view neutrophil activation as a continuum of processes, priming steps, and signal cascades with varying effects and outcomes, all focused on the realization of one goal: the transition of naive, circulating neutrophils to their microbe-eliminating, tissue-resident counterparts ( Figure 1 ).

## NEUTROPHILS AND THE ELIMINATION OF MICROBES

The basic instruction set of the activated neutrophil is both effective and ruthless in its simplicity: (1) kill microbes, (2) do no harm to the host, and (3) when in doubt, see rule 1. To fulfill this antimicrobial agenda,

Figure 1

<!-- image -->

Neutrophil recruitment to sites of inflammation. The circulating neutrophil must recognize signs of inflammation and migrate to areas where its antimicrobial arsenal is needed for the elimination of infection. ( a ) Close to the inflammatory sites, stimulated endothelial cells expose a class of molecules, the selectins, which serve to capture circulating neutrophils and tether them to the endothelium. ( b ) Selectin-mediated rolling along chemoattractant gradients then ensues, followed by ( ) integrin-mediated firm adhesion. c Subsequently, the neutrophil traverses through the endothelium and arrives at the site of inflammation. Here, the neutrophil releases cytokines that recruit other immune cells, and it begins to implement its antimicrobial agenda. Among the processes employed are engulfment of microbes via receptor-mediated phagocytosis, release of granular antimicrobial molecules through degranulation, and formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs).

neutrophils possess an array of toxic weapons that are carefully regulated through controlled mechanisms. These antimicrobial weapons vary considerably in their methods of action and thus reflect the neutrophil's attempt to exploit any and all weaknesses that microbes might present during the course of infection. An understanding of these weapons, their action, and their method of release is critical to understanding neutrophil function.

## Granules and Degranulation

Theneutrophil must safely transport a plethora of dangerous substances through the bloodstream and then correctly deploy them at the appropriate time. Therefore, it comes as no surprise that a specialty storage organelle has evolved in neutrophils: the granule. Expectedly, these structures are replete with specifically tuned mechanics that address the unique

needs of neutrophils. Granules are, however, far more than just latent repository organelles for dangerous substances; they are active and indispensable participants in almost all neutrophil activities during inflammation.

As mentioned above, there are three fundamental types of granules in neutrophils ( Figure 2 ). Azurophilic granules (also known as peroxidase-positive or primary granules) are the largest, measuring approximately 0.3 µ M in diameter, and are the first formed during neutrophil maturation. They are named for their ability to take up the basic dye azure A and contain myeloperoxidase (MPO), an enzyme critical in the oxidative burst (32, 33). Other cargo of this granule class include the defensins, lysozyme, bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI), and a number of serine proteases: neutrophil elastase (NE), proteinase 3 (PR3), and cathepsin G (CG) (34). As such, these granules are brimming with antimicrobial

Figure 2

<!-- image -->

Neutrophil granules. Neutrophil granules carry a rich variety of antimicrobials and signaling molecules. They are typically divided into three types (primary or azurophilic, secondary or specific, and tertiary or gelatinase). Additionally, structures called secretory vesicles are also considered to be a granule subset. Considerable overlap exists in the cargo of the different granules, and their contents seem determined by the timepoint during hematopoiesis at which they are produced (5). Granules also differ in their ability to mobilize, with secretory vesicles being the first to fuse with the plasma membrane and the azurophilic granules demonstrating the least degranulation propensity.

## Inflammation:

recruitment and activation of immune cells upon infection or injury; when uncontrolled it leads to tissue damage

compounds and function as a primary repository for the molecular weaponry of neutrophils. The second class of granules, the specific (or secondary) granules, are smaller (0.1 µ M diameter), do not contain MPO, and are characterized by the presence of the glycoprotein lactoferrin. These granules are formed after azurophilic granules; they also contain a wide range of antimicrobial compounds including NGAL, hCAP-18, and lysozyme (33, 35). The third class, the gelatinase (tertiary) granules, are also MPO-negative, are smaller than specific granules, and contain few antimicrobials, but they serve as a storage location for a number of metalloproteases, such as gelatinase and leukolysin. These granules are also the last population of granules formed during neutrophil maturation (5). Finally, a fourth set of structures, the secretory vesicles, are also commonly considered part of the neutrophil granule family. In contrast to the classical granules, these do not bud from the Golgi, but instead are formed through endocytosis in the end stages of neutrophil maturation (36). Consequently, their cargo consists predominantly of plasma-derived proteins such as albumin. The membrane of secretory vesicles serves as a reservoir for a number of important membrane-bound molecules employed during neutrophil migration.

Asaneutrophil proceeds through activation, granules are mobilized and fuse with either the plasma membrane or the phagosome, releasing their contents into the respective environment. In both cases, the membrane of the granule becomes a permanent part of the target membrane, thus altering its molecular composition (6). The different classes of granules demonstrate varying propensities for mobilization in response to inflammatory signals: Azurophilic granules are the most difficult to mobilize, followed by specific granules, gelatinase granules, and finally, secretory vesicles (37-41). The underlying mechanisms for this differential mobilization are not entirely understood, althoughregulationofintracellular calcium levels appears to play a salient role (32, 39). Because of this varying mobilization propensity, each

granule subset has been traditionally associated with a particular stage of neutrophil activation.

After neutrophils contact the endothelium, stimulation through selectins and chemoattractants induces mobilization of secretory vesicles, whose membranes are rich in key factors necessary for continued activation of the neutrophil, including, among others, the β 2 integrins, complement and fMLP receptors, as well as the Fc γ RIII receptor CD16 (5, 38, 39, 42). Fusion of the secretory vesicles with the plasma membraneexposes these components to the external environment. This results in the transition to firm adhesion, mediated by β 2 integrin interaction with the endothelium. As they proceed through the endothelium, neutrophils are exposedtofurtheractivation signals that initiate mobilization of gelatinase granules, thereby releasing metalloproteases. The activity of these proteases may help neutrophils traverse the basement membrane, although this has not been conclusively demonstrated (43, 44).

At the inflammatory site, complete activation of the neutrophil ensues, prompting initiation of the oxidative burst and mobilization of the azurophilic and specific granules. These granules either fuse with the phagosome (see section on Phagocytosis, below), contributing to the antimicrobial activities of this compartment, or fuse with the plasma membrane, releasing their potent antimicrobials into the tissue. The fusion of specific granules with the plasma or phagosomal membrane is of particular importance for the oxidative burst, as flavocytochrome b558, a component of the NADPH oxidase machinery, resides in the specific granule membrane (45). This fusion permits assembly of the NADPH oxidase complex and allows reactive oxygen species (ROS) production both inside the phagolysosome and outside of the cell. Degranulation of primary and secondary granules contributes to the creation of an antimicrobial milieu at the inflammatory site and produces an environment inhospitable to invading pathogens.

The release of granular proteins during degranulation presents the astute observer with a tempting proposition: Could these granular

components also serve as signaling molecules for subsequent inflammatory cell recruitment? Recent studies have provided experimental evidence suggesting this does seem to be the case: Granule proteins from neutrophils, including PR3 and azurocidin, can induce monocyte recruitment. Furthermore, neutrophil granule proteins may increase macrophage bacterial clearance by enhancing phagocytosis (46). This could be advantageous in situations in which the extracellular concentration of released granule proteins is insufficient to exert extensive microbicidal effects. In such cases, the granule proteins would instead operate as signaling and recruitment factors (see section on Neutrophils in Immune Cell Cross Talk, below).

By necessity, most data on neutrophil degranulation and its effects on neutrophil activity have been acquired through biochemical approaches performed exclusively in vitro. A pertinent question therefore presents itself: Is this process truly relevant during the in vivo inflammatory response? The data here are sparse, and understandably so: Historically, the possibilities for such an in vivo observation have been restrained by technical limitations. Most evidence for in vivo degranulation relies on observation of increased levels of extracellular granular proteins at inflammatory sites. Even so, release of granular components could occur primarily through other means, most notably through formation of neutrophil extracellular traps, cell damage, or cell lysis. With the advent of intravital microscopy techniques, direct observation of the degranulation process in vivo may soon be realized.

## Antimicrobial Proteins

Neutrophils produce a plethora of peptides and proteins that directly or indirectly kill microbes ( Table 1 ). Many of these antimicrobials were identified through biochemical fractionation of neutrophil extracts, and their in vitro activity is easily demonstrated in optimized conditions; nonetheless, showing in vivo relevance is challenging. The diversity of antimicrobials suggests that some of them evolved to act together,

whereas others may be redundant. One of the challenges in understanding the neutrophil's antimicrobial mechanisms is to study their function during concerted action and in conditions that mimic an infection site. Therefore, testing the relevance of antimicrobials in vivo is essential. This is, however, particularly challenging; ablation of a single antimicrobial gene may only subtly affect immune defense. In addition, much biochemical identification of neutrophil antimicrobials has been performed in rabbits and humans, species with abundant neutrophils. Mice, which are genetically tractable, have neutrophils that function differently from those of other species. Indeed, as already mentioned, mice lack the genes for some antimicrobials identified in humans. Interestingly, there are few clinically relevant innate immune deficiencies that directly link antimicrobial activity with a particular mutation. Thus, with few exceptions, evidence for clinical or biological relevance of these molecules is still lacking.

There are three main types of antimicrobials: ( a ) cationic peptides and proteins that bind to microbial membranes, ( b ) enzymes, and ( ) c proteins that deprive microorganisms of essential nutrients. Here we present an overview of this rich field of investigation. There are more than 800 antimicrobial peptides described in nature, some of them highly conserved throughout evolution (47). These peptides are often charged, a feature that probably promotes their initial interaction with microbial surfaces. Under artificial conditions, many of these peptides disrupt the membrane integrity. Because in vitro tests are often executed at high antimicrobial concentrations to obtain maximal microbial killing in the shortest possible time, it is unclear whether this disruption reflects their mechanism of action under physiological conditions. Alternatively, some antimicrobials are thought to disrupt essential microbial functions, such as DNA replication, transcription, or production of energy. Little is known about antimicrobial concentrations achieved at inflammatory sites or in the phagosome. This information, as well as information about the synergistic interactions of different

Table 1 Mechanism of action of neutrophil antimicrobial proteins

| Antimicrobial peptide                      | Antimicrobial mechanism a                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Cationic antimicrobial peptides            | Cationic antimicrobial peptides                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| α -defensins (HNP-1, HNP-2, HNP-3, HNP-4)  | /squaresolid Permeabilize membrane bilayers containing negatively charged phospholipids /squaresolid Inhibit DNA, RNA as well as protein biosynthesis /squaresolid Inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis               |
| LL-37                                      | Transmembrane pore-forming                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| BPI                                        | Increase bacterial permeability and hydrolysis of bacterial phospholipids by binding to LPS                                                                                                                                  |
| Histones                                   | Unknown mechanism                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Proteolytic enzymes                        | Proteolytic enzymes                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Lysozyme                                   | Degrades bacterial cell wall                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Proteinase 3 (PR3)                         | Mechanism independent of a proteolytic activity by binding to the bacterial membrane                                                                                                                                         |
| Neutrophil elastase (NE), cathepsin G (CG) | /squaresolid Cleaves bacterial virulence factors and outer membrane proteins /squaresolid Mechanism independent of a proteolytic activity by binding to                                                                      |
| Azurocidin                                 | Mechanism independent of a proteolytic activity by binding to the bacterial membrane                                                                                                                                         |
| Metal chelator proteins                    | Metal chelator proteins                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Lactoferrin                                | /squaresolid Alters bacterial growth by binding to iron, an essential bacterial nutrient /squaresolid Binds to the lipid A part of LPS, causing a release of LPS from the cell wall and an increase in membrane permeability |
| Calprotectin                               | Alters bacterial growth by sequestering manganese and zinc                                                                                                                                                                   |

a Only direct actions of neutrophil antimicrobial proteins on microbes are listed in the table.

antimicrobials, is essential for designing appropriate in vitro conditions to probe mechanisms of action.

The neutrophil cationic antimicrobial peptides include defensins and cathelicidins. Neutrophils mostly produce α -defensins, a protein family whose members possess multiple disulfide bonds and whose structures may change under physiological conditions and increase their activity (48). A surprising number of functions are assigned to defensins, but none have been validated in vivo. Interestingly, inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis (49) was recently shown at low concentrations that may be more similar to those present at inflammatory sites. Cathelicidins, including the wellstudied LL-37, are proteolytically processed

from larger proteins, and in addition to their antimicrobial activity, they may potentiate DNAactivation of dendritic cells (DCs) (50).

Neutrophils also contain a number of full-length cationic antimicrobial proteins, including BPI and histones. BPI is cationic and binds LPS avidly, much like its structural cousin the LPS binding protein. BPI binding to LPS results in increased bacterial permeability and hydrolysis of bacterial phospholipids; cell death then follows (51). Interestingly, histones are extremely effective antimicrobials and were one of the first antimicrobials described (52). The significance of histones (and of the peptides derived from them) as microbials remains to be demonstrated in vivo (53). Given their dual role as an architectural

scaffold for DNA and as antimicrobials, their in vivo significance is particularly difficult to demonstrate.

The second class of neutrophil antimicrobials encompasses a broad assortment of proteolytic enzymes that participate in microbe destruction. Lysozyme destroys the bacterial wall, making it an obvious antimicrobial, as shown in mice deficient in this enzyme (54). Surprisingly, this occurred independently of its enzymatic activity (55). Neutrophils also contain several serine proteases (including PR3, CG, and NE, collectively known as the serprocidins) that exhibit differing specificities. They are tightly regulated intra- and extracellularly by serpins, indicating that their activity is deployed under specific conditions. NE cleaves enterobacterial virulence factors with high specificity (56), indicating the possibility of the coevolution of microbial virulence factors and antimicrobial effectors. Of further interest, NE mutations in humans, but not genetic ablation of this enzyme in mice, result in neutropenia. This can be rescued by the administration of recombinant granulocyte macrophage colonystimulating factor (GM-CSF); however, these patients still exhibit significant susceptibility to infections. Mice deficient in NE or CG are highly susceptible to bacterial and fungal infections (57, 58). Another protein, azurocidin, is a member of the same family but lacks protease activity. Unexpectedly, it still kills microbes, suggesting that these proteins may all have antimicrobial activity independent of proteolysis, perhaps as a result of their cationicity. These serine proteases also play a salient role in autoimmunity (see discussion in section on Autoimmunity, below) (59).

The final class of neutrophil antimicrobials consists of a number of proteins that chelate essential metals from microbes and possibly impact bacterial growth. Two of these chelators are lactoferrin, first identified in milk, which binds preferentially to iron, and calprotectin (also called S100A and many other names), which sequesters zinc (60) and results in 'nutritional immunity' (61).

## Reactive Oxygen Species

Upon activation, neutrophils produce ROS in a process called the respiratory burst. It is misleading to think of ROS as a single entity because they differ in their stability, reactivity, and permeability to membranes (62). However, all ROS can modify and damage other molecules, properties exploited by the host cell for signaling and antimicrobial action.

The NADPH oxidase complex assembles on the phagosomal and plasma membranes and begins the reactive oxygen cascade by reducing molecular oxygen to superoxide. Downstream of superoxide, many potential reactions can occur (for details, see References 62-64). Superoxide, though not a strong oxidant, rapidly dismutates, forming hydrogen peroxide. Superoxide can also react with nitric oxide, which is produced at high levels at inflammatory sites, to form peroxynitrite, a strong oxidant. Upon degranulation into the phagosome, MPO can react with hydrogen peroxide to produce various reactive species, including hypohalous acids. Hypochlorous acid, thought to be the major product of MPO in the phagosome, is more reactive than superoxide and is antimicrobial in vitro. Thus, it is assumed to have direct antimicrobial effects in the phagosome. However, a theoretical model of the phagosome suggests that most of the hypochlorous acid produced would react with host proteins before reaching the bacterium. This model predicts that chloramines, produced when hypochlorous acid reacts with amine groups, may be the most relevant antimicrobial actors in the phagosome (65).

ROS are clearly important for neutrophil antimicrobial activity: Neutrophils from chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) patients kill microbes poorly, making these patients susceptible to many infections. Interestingly, CGD patients can control catalase-negative bacteria, which produce, but do not degrade, their own hydrogen peroxide, thus providing a substrate for reactions downstream in the reactive oxygen cascade (66). NADPH oxidase is also implicated in the regulation of

Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD): caused by mutations rendering the NADPH oxidase nonfunctional, characterized by susceptibility to infection and autoinflammation

inflammation, which explains why CGD patients often suffer from autoinflammatory diseases (67).

Paradoxically, although MPO is required for neutrophil microbicidal activity in vitro, MPO-deficient individuals do not have striking clinical manifestations (68, 69). Some MPOdeficient individuals suffer from frequent or severe infections, especially with Candida species, andafewhavebeenmistakenforCGDpatients. However, most MPO-deficient individuals in the developed world have apparently normal immunity. The mild effects of MPO deficiency suggest that MPO's products are not essential for antimicrobial action. Indeed, in the absence of MPO, other reactive species (e.g., superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, hydroperoxyl radical, peroxynitrite) can still be produced in the neutrophil phagosome; hydroperoxyl radical is predicted to be present at antimicrobial concentrations (65). However, there may be a broader reason for this discrepancy. Modern technologies can distinguish between individuals who are partially and completely MPO deficient, and partial MPO deficiency does not correlate with pathology (70). Residual activity of MPO may be sufficient for antimicrobial activity: In the case of CGD, even 1% of normal NADPH oxidase activity leads to an improved prognosis (71). Epidemiological studies distinguishing the degrees of MPO deficiency and their correlation with clinical manifestations may be necessary to understand the function of MPO.

In addition to direct antimicrobial action, ROS can modify host molecules. Because these species are highly reactive, they are often thought to be too nonspecific to be involved in signaling. However, specificity can be achieved on the submolecular level, by cellular redox buffering systems and by limited diffusion of ROS owing to their short half-lives (72). A well-studied example of ROS in signaling is the reversible regulation of various targets (including phosphatases, metalloproteinases, and caspases) by direct oxidation of cysteine residues. In addition, neutrophil granule proteases can be regulated by oxidative inactivation of their inhibitors or by direct oxidation

(73, 74). Furthermore, superoxide generation leads to an ionic influx into the phagosome to compensate for charge; this may activate granule proteases by releasing them from their putative matrix (75). There is controversy around which ions and which channel are responsible for charge compensation, but this theory of protease activation is certainly intriguing (69).

Studies of ROS are hampered by various technical issues. Ideally, a probe for ROS should be specific, targetable to particular intracellular compartments, and capable of being used in vivo. Traditional probes for ROS do not meet these specifications; in addition, the probes often become radical species (76). One promising new approach for ROS detection that meets these criteria is the use of redox-sensitive fluorescent proteinbased probes, such as roGFP and HyPer (76). Other methods that can be used in vivo include transcription profiling of superoxide or hydrogen peroxide-sensitive genes as well as the detection of relatively stable products of reactive oxygen using mass spectrometry (76).

## Phagocytosis

Phagocytosis is the major mechanism to remove pathogens and cell debris. It is an active, receptor-mediated process during which a particle is internalized by the cell membrane into a vacuole called the phagosome. As with other phagocytes, the mechanistic details of internalization depend on the type of interaction between the neutrophil and the microorganism. Interaction can be direct, through recognition of PAMPs by pattern-recognition receptors, or opsonin mediated. The latter mechanism is better characterized and includes two prototypical examples: Fc γ R-mediated phagocytosis, which relies on the formation of pseudopod extensions for engulfment of IgG-opsonized particles, and complement receptor-mediated phagocytosis, which does not require membrane extensions or pseudopods (77).

After engulfment, the nascent phagosome is relatively benign to microorganisms, acquiring its lethal properties only after a drastic

maturation process. Our understanding of this process is largely based on studies in macrophages, and although these are certainly instructive, essential differences exist in neutrophils. Macrophage phagocytosis follows an endocytic maturation pathway: In neutrophils, phagosome maturation happens upon fusion of granules to the phagosome, whereby delivery of antimicrobial molecules into the phagosomal lumen occurs. Simultaneously, assembly of the NADPH oxidase on the phagosomal membrane allows ROS production, and jointly, these two mechanisms create an environment toxic to most pathogens. Neutrophil phagosomal pH regulation also differs significantly from that observed in macrophages. While the macrophage phagosome gradually acidifies, neutrophil phagosomal pH is initially alkaline (78) and remains neutral for prolonged periods of time (79). The maintenance of this alkaline pH is essential for the activation of the major serine proteases NE and CG, and it is sustained via NADPH oxidase activity, despite continuing fusion of acidic granules. Key events of the maturation process are described in more detail in Reference 80.

Not all pathogens succumb to the hostile environment of the phagosome. In fact, some have evolved strategies to survive inside neutrophils. These strategies include interfering with engulfment, modulating phagosome maturation, and creating a more hospitable intraphagosomal environment. The polysaccharide capsule expressed by Staphylococcus aureus confers antiphagocytic properties (81). Helicobacter pylori can disrupt targeting of NADPH oxidase to the phagosome so that superoxide anions accumulate extracellularly rather than in the phagosome (82). Francisella tularensis prevents triggering of the oxidative burst and also inhibits ROS production in response to other stimuli (83). Finally, other pathogens, such as Salmonella typhimurium and Streptococcus pyogenes , can efficiently block granule fusion with the phagosome (84, 85). The variety of mechanisms evolved by intracellular pathogens to resist killing and enable survival within the phagosome further emphasizes the

importance of phagocytosis in the innate immune defense.

## Neutrophil Extracellular Traps

Upon stimulation, neutrophils can undergo NETosis, an active form of cell death that leads to release of decondensed chromatin into the extracellular space (86, 87). The fibrous structures termed NETs contain histones as well as antimicrobial granular and cytoplasmic proteins (88). NETs trap many types of microbes ex vivo and have been found in various disease models in vivo; they are thought to kill microbes by exposing them to high local concentrations of antimicrobials (89).

The mechanism of NET formation is not completely understood. The reactive oxygen pathway is involved, as NADPH oxidase and MPO are required for NET formation in response to chemical and biological stimuli (87, 90, 91). Nitric oxide donors can induce NETs via a mechanism that also requires ROS (90), a finding that awaits genetic confirmation. All activators of NET formation tested so far require ROSproduction. S. aureus maybeanexception, although those experiments were done using pharmacological inhibitors, not cells deficient in ROS production (92). Upstream of NADPH oxidase, the Raf-MEK-ERK pathway is implicated in NET formation (93), but further along in the process, NE translocates from the granules to the nucleus and degrades histones, leading to chromatin decondensation (94). Histone citrullination may also play a role in NET formation, although this has not been confirmed in primary human neutrophils (95-97). Autophagy is also thought to be required for NET formation, but this has so far been shown only using a nonspecific inhibitor of autophagy (98).

The majority of research on NETs has been conducted ex vivo. Ideally, to test the relevance of NETs, a 'NETs knockout' organism should be generated to investigate its response to pathogens. Unfortunately, it is not possible to eliminate the main components of NETsDNA and histones-from an infection model. Moreover, the factors that are important for

Autophagy: a process in which cellular contents are degraded in lysosomes, especially in conditions of nutrient scarcity and infection

## Cystic fibrosis:

caused by defects in the CFTR ion transporter, characterized by thick, sticky mucus and decreases in lung and digestive function

NET formation, such as NADPH oxidase, MPO, and NE, are also critical for other antimicrobial neutrophil functions. For now, the evidence for the relevance of NETs is indirect. On the one hand, bacteria that express DNases as virulence factors disseminate more efficiently in the host, which may point to evolutionary pressure to avoid entrapment by NETs (99, 100). In addition, a persistent Aspergillus infection in a CGD patient was cleared after gene therapy, which restored NADPH oxidase activity, NET formation, and NET-mediated but not phagocytosis-mediated killing by the patient's neutrophils ex vivo (101). On the other hand, the immune system has redundant mechanisms to fight infection, and it may be that NETs are especially important under certain conditions, such as during infections with large pathogens that are not readily phagocytosed.

NETs can also have detrimental effects on the host. Because NETs expose self molecules extracellularly, they lead to autoimmunity: NETs have been implicated in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), an autoimmune disease characterized by the formation of autoantibodies, often against chromatin and neutrophil components (102-106) (see section on Autoimmunity, below). Platelet-induced NETs, formed during sepsis, are associated with hepatotoxicity due to tissue damage (107). Platelets also bind to NETs, raising the possibility that NETs nucleate blood clots in the context of deep vein thrombosis (108). NETs have also been observed in the airway fluids of cystic fibrosis patients, where they may increase the viscosity of the sputum and decrease lung function (109).

## NEUTROPHILS IN IMMUNE CELL CROSS TALK

Neutrophils participate in the communication networks that form the foundations of immunity, issuing instructions to practically all other immune cells. As one of the first cell types to arrive at sites of infection, neutrophils secrete cytokines and chemokines critical in the unfolding of the inflammatory response and in

establishing the correct environmental conditions to launch the adaptive immune response. The cytokines released by PMNs are often synthesized de novo. Although neutrophils transcribe little after leaving the bone marrow, once activated, these cells undergo a transcriptional burst that results in the synthesis of signaling molecules (110, 111). Compared with other immune cells (e.g., macrophages), neutrophils typically produce lower amounts of cytokines per cell, but they are so abundant at inflammatory sites that their contribution to total cytokine levels is significant (4). Furthermore, neutrophil-secreted proteases can modulate signaling networks in vivo through cytokine processing (112).

The initial neutrophil cytokine response is an appeal for immunological reinforcement. The most abundantly produced cytokine, IL-8, primarily serves to recruit other neutrophils (113). Similarly, neutrophil-derived proinflammatory IL-1 β and TNFα induce other cells to produce neutrophil chemoattractants (114, 115) (for a comprehensive list of cytokines produced by neutrophils, please see References 115, 116). In addition to cytokines, neutrophils release other signaling mediators, including granule contents (117), lipids (118), and ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (119). They also communicate via cell-cell contact (120). Here we provide examples of how neutrophils interact with other cells to shape the immune response (see Figure 3 ).

## Monocytes and Macrophages

As they respond to infection or injury, neutrophils and their relatives in the monocyte/macrophage lineage coordinate their activities, leading to alternating waves of recruitment of these two cell types. Macrophages and patrolling monocytes are among the initial detectors of PAMPs and endogenous activators, the danger-associated molecular patterns (121), and these cells work to summon large numbers of neutrophils to the inflammatory locus. The influx of neutrophils is followed closely by the arrival of monocytes, suggesting a causal link

<!-- image -->

Neutrophil communication with other immune cells. Neutrophils interact with a variety of cell types. They are important both for recruitment of monocytes and dendritic cells (DCs) to infected tissues and for enhancement of macrophage and DC activity. In contrast, in the lymph nodes, neutrophils impede DC function by inhibiting antigen presentation to CD4 + cells. Neutrophils also interact with the adaptive arm of the immune system: They can act as antigen-presenting cells by cross-presenting antigen to CD8 + T cells; they also secrete IL-12, which activates T cells. T cells, in turn, activate neutrophils by secreting IFNγ . Finally, neutrophils, DCs and natural killer (NK) cells colocalize and enhance each other's activity via receptor-receptor interactions and soluble mediators.

behind these temporal dynamics. Indeed, neutrophils recruit monocytes via several different mechanisms. They express classical monocyte chemoattractants such as CCL2 (MCP-1) (122), CCL3 (MIP-1 α ) (123), CCL20 (MIP3 α ), and CCL19 (MIP-3 β ) (124). Additionally, and perhaps more unexpectedly, neutrophils use granule proteins to induce extravasation of monocytes in vivo, as shown for LL-37, azurocidin (HBP/CAP37), and CG (125-127). Monocyterecruitmentisalsoaffectedindirectly by neutrophils: via upregulation of endothelial adhesion factors, increase of transendothelial permeability, enhancement of production of chemoattractants by other cell types, and modulation of the activities of these chemokines via proteolytic processing (reviewed in 128). In addition to recruitment, neutrophils modulate monocyte and macrophage cytokine production (128), directly enhancing their

microbicidal activity (129). The circuitous nature of the cross talk of these two cell types becomes obvious during inflammation abatement: Monocytes, recruited by neutrophils and differentiated into macrophages, repress further neutrophil chemotaxis and ensure the appropriate removal of their postmortem remains (see section on Neutrophils and Resolution of Inflammation, below).

## Dendritic Cells

Neutrophils can also recruit and activate DCs in vivo. This was recently illustrated in a mouse model of Leishmaniasis, where subcutaneous inoculation of Leishmania major triggered a massive and rapid infiltration of neutrophils (130). These cells secrete the chemokine CCL3, recruiting DCs to the site of inoculation and initiating a protective

Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2012.30:459-489. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Kansas on 01/22/19. For personal use only.

## DC-SIGN:

dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin

## Granulocyte receptor 1 (Gr1):

the anti-Gr1 antibody RB6-8C5 reacts with both Ly6G (specific for neutrophils) and Ly6C (present on many immune cell types)

Th17 cells: subset of T helper cells that produce IL-17, important in inflammation and implicated in autoimmunity

Th1 response (131). Interestingly, activated neutrophils can induce the maturation of DCs in vitro through specific receptor-receptor interactions between Mac-1 and DC-SIGN, leading to local secretion of TNFα (120). In this case, the reduced levels of cytokine production foster specificity, as only proximal DCs receive the maturation signal. A similar activation model was earlier proposed for Toxoplasma gondii (132). Neutrophil-activated DCs produce the proinflammatory cytokine IL-12 and induce proliferation of T cells (120, 132). However, some of these experiments should be interpreted cautiously because they are based on the injection of the anti-Gr1 antibody (RB6), which depletes neutrophils but may also result in depletion of many other cell types in mice. The anti-Ly6G monoclonal antibody is morespecific and hence a better reagent for this type of experiment (133). The crucial role of neutrophils in DC activation was recently confirmed using anti-Ly6G antibody depletion: In Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, timely trafficking of DCs to lymph nodes and activation of CD4 + Tcells were both dependent on PMNs. Furthermore, this study demonstrated that DCs presented bacterial antigens when they ingested infected neutrophils just as efficiently as they did via direct uptake of Mycobacterium (134). In sharp contrast to the above findings, a separate study using an immunization model showed that neutrophils recruited to lymph nodes compete for antigen with DCs and macrophages and that these neutrophils inhibit their interactions with T cells (135). It is possible that neutrophils have site-specific effects on DCs and can be stimulatory at peripheral sites and inhibitory in the lymph nodes. Neutrophils exhibit fascinating and somewhat enigmatic behavior in the lymph nodes, where they engage in swarming activity in response to parasitic infection (136). The functions and mechanistic details of these swarms are unknown and represent questions of immense interest.

## Natural Killer Cells

Studies of interactions between neutrophil and natural killer (NK) cells have historically been

performed in vitro, and their interpretation is frustratingly difficult owing to the questionable purity of cell preparations. Recently, it was shown that neutrophils, NK cells, and DCs interact in a m' enage ' a trois involving both cytokine signaling and direct cell-cell contact (137, 138). In one report, infection of mice with Legionella pneumophila triggered production of IFNγ by NK cells; this was dependent on both PMN-derived IL-18 and DC-derived IL-12 (137). Similarly, human neutrophils, NK cells, and DCs colocalize at inflammatory sites, and a positive feedback loop has been proposed onthebasis of in vitro data. In this scheme, neutrophils interact with a specific subset of DCs, (via CD18-ICAM-1 interactions), prompting the DCs to produce IL-12p70, which in turn stimulates IFNγ production by NK cells and further activates neutrophils. Simultaneously, neutrophils also activate NK cells by direct contact (139). Additional in vitro interactions between neutrophils and NK cells are extensively reviewed in Reference 138.

## Lymphocytes

Asurprising finding in recent years is the extensive cross talk between cells located at opposite ends of the immune spectrum. Previously thought to belong to isolated compartments, neutrophils and T cells shape and impact each other's functions, both qualitatively and quantitatively (140). Neutrophils affect T cell function indirectly via DCs, as outlined above, but can also influence T cell function directly. PMNs secrete IL-12, which may be crucial for Th1 cell differentiation (141, 142). They also express several T cell chemoattractants (116) as well as B cell development and maturation factors (143, 144). Cytokine communication occurs in both directions: For instance, IFNγ , which is secreted by T cells, prolongs neutrophil life span, induces gene expression, and increases phagocytic capacity (145). The T helper 17 (Th17) cell subset secretes IL-17, a key cytokine in the control of neutrophil dynamics, which acts by upregulating expression of CXCL8 (IL-8), G-CSF, and TNFα

by epithelial, endothelial, and stromal cells (146). Collectively, these Th17-associated cytokines increase granulopoeisis as well as the recruitment and life span of neutrophils.

Neutrophils potentially have suppressive effects on T cells via two proposed mechanisms: ( a ) L-arginine depletion by release of arginase, which inhibits T cell responses in vitro (147), and ( ) hydrogen peroxide-mediated suppresb sion, as proposed in a cancer model (119) (see section on Cancer, below). Direct evidence of such interactions in vivo is still missing.

Interestingly, neutrophils influence CD8 + Tcell responses by cross-presenting exogenous antigens in vivo. Using mice in which professional antigen-presenting cells do not express functional MHC class I, Beauvillain et al. (148) showed that antigen-pulsed neutrophils can induce differentiation of cytotoxic T cells. These striking findings imply that neutrophils have characteristics of antigen-presenting cells. Neutrophils also appear capable of expressing MHC class II and costimulatory molecules under inflammatory conditions (149-151), and they can present antigen to CD4 + T cells in vitro (152-154). However, the functional significance for protective immunity remains unclear, especially in light of the finding that mouse neutrophils that migrate to the lymph node have a negative effect on CD4 responses in an immunization system (135). In humans, there are large variations in the ability of donors to express MHC class II (149, 151), suggesting concomitant variations in the ability to activate T cells, a finding that could have implications for susceptibility to autoimmune diseases. Therefore, neutrophil modulation of adaptive immunity seems to be highly complex and is only now starting to be unraveled.

## NEUTROPHILS AND RESOLUTION OF INFLAMMATION

The lethal cargo of neutrophils is not only destructive toward invading microbes, but also harmful to host cells. Thus, neutrophil deployment must be tightly controlled.

Although some collateral damage to host tissues is inevitable during infection, neutrophils must be removed before they have serious, detrimental effects on inflamed tissues. Resolution of inflammation is an active process that limits further leukocyte infiltration and removes apoptotic cells from inflamed sites. This process is essential for maintenance of tissue homeostasis and, if impeded, leads to 'nonresolving inflammation,' a problematic condition that contributes to many diseases.

## Apoptosis and Clearance

Apoptosis is a central aspect of inflammation resolution. Once neutrophils have executed their antimicrobial agenda, they die via a builtin cell-death program. However, not only does apoptosis reduce the number of neutrophils present, it also produces signals that abrogate further neutrophil recruitment. Phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils also reprograms macrophages to adopt an anti-inflammatory phenotype.

Neutrophil death is influenced by inflammatory mediators such as GM-CSF and LPS and by environmental conditions such as hypoxia, all of which prolong neutrophil survival. The signaling networks that regulate survival have also been well characterized. These networks also control the expression of known antiapoptotic (Mcl-1 and A1) or proapoptotic proteins (Bad, Bax, Bak, and Bid), and they also activate caspases (for an extensive review, see Reference 155). Given that neutrophils are terminally differentiated, it is unexpected that molecules controlling cell proliferation regulate survival. Proposed to have prosurvival effects, one such protein is survivin. It is expressed more highly in immature neutrophils than in mature ones, but its expression can be restored in mature cells by inflammatory signals such as G-CSF or GM-CSF. In line with these findings, survivin is also highly expressed in neutrophils at sites of inflammation, such as cystic fibrosis sputum, appendix infiltrates, and intestines of patients with ulcerative colitis (156).

Ulcerative colitis: a type of inflammatory bowel disease characterized by ulcers and tissue erosion in the colon and rectum

## Wegener's granulomatosis:

vasculitis affecting the lungs, nose, and kidneys; inflammation leads to reduced blood flow, tissue destruction, and damage of vital organs

Prostaglandins and leukotrienes: lipids synthesized by cyclooxygenases and 5-lipoxygenase, respectively, in the arachidonic acid pathway; have proinflammatory functions including leukocyte recruitment

Similarly, cyclin-dependent kinases function as prosurvival factors in neutrophils. Pharmacological inhibition of these cell cycle regulators induce caspase-dependent apoptosis and block life-span extension by survival factors (157). More recently, prosurvival effects were also attributed to proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). This factor usually resides in the nucleus, where it is involved in DNA replication, but in neutrophils, it associates with procaspases in the cytosol and is thought to prevent their activation. During apoptosis, PCNAistargetedforproteosomaldegradation, which correlates with an increase in caspase-3 and caspase-8 activities. This mechanism is relevant in Wegener's granulomatosis and sepsis, where stabilization of PCNA is associated with resistance of neutrophils to apoptosis (158).

Equally important for the resolution of inflammation is the proper removal of apoptotic cells. This relies on the release of 'find-me' signals at early stages of cell death, which attract phagocytes. Likewise, distinct 'eat me' signals are required for specific recognition of apoptotic cells. Ingestion of apoptotic cells by macrophages drives the production of the antiinflammatory cytokines tumor growth factor (TGF)β and IL-10 (155). Failure to clear these apoptotic cells, by contrast, results in secondary necrosis and release of products that generate proinflammatory signals ( Figure 4 ).

## Lipid Mediator Class Switch

Soluble mediators play a crucial role in the resolution of inflammation. In neutrophils, a particularly prominent role is assumed by lipid mediators. The successful progression of inflammation appears to hinge on a shift in the composition of secreted lipids. At early stages of inflammation, neutrophils synthesize proinflammatory lipid mediators, such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes. These are derived from arachidonate precursor molecules and are synthesized through the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways. During the later stages of the inflammatory response, neutrophils interact with various cell types in

their vicinity (epithelial cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, platelets, and leukocytes) and participate in the transcellular biosynthesis of lipid mediators with anti-inflammatory and proresolving activities, such as lipoxins, resolvins, and protectins. A major lipid mediator class switch thus exists, governed by temporally regulated expression of different lipoxygenases and the mobilization of different fatty acid substrates. The different biosynthesis pathways of proresolving lipid mediators have been reviewed in detail elsewhere (118). Interestingly, microorganisms are also a source of lipid precursors that can be used by neutrophils for resolvin synthesis. Thus, microbes also likely participate in synthesis of mediators with proresolving functions at the site of infection (159, 160).

How do lipid mediators contribute to the termination of inflammation? Lipoxins, resolvins, and protectins exert cell-type specific effects, promoting monocyte/macrophage recruitment and activation while inhibiting neutrophil functions. The inhibitory effect extends to all essential steps of neutrophil responses: migration, adhesion, and activation. All three lipid mediators reduce neutrophil recruitment, a process that involves the lipoxinA4 receptor and the leukotriene B4 receptor (BLT1) (161-167). Ariel et al. (168) also proposed an interesting mechanism of action for lipoxins, resolvins, and protectins in clearing inflammatory sites. They showed that neutrophil exposure to these lipids increases expression of CCR5 on the surface of late apoptotic neutrophils, leading to efficient sequestration of the chemoattractants CCL3 and CCL5. The sequestration of these chemokines means they are unavailable to recruit neutrophils to inflamed sites (168) ( Figure 4 ). This mechanism complements other anti-inflammatory processes in which chemokines are inactivated by neutrophil proteases. Of these lipids, lipoxins are the most completely understood. In addition to neutrophil recruitment, lipoxins can inhibit the shedding of L-selectin and the upregulation of β 2 integrins in response to proinflammatory stimuli, thereby reducing adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells (169, 170). Finally,

Figure 4

<!-- image -->

From inflammation to homeostasis: neutrophil apoptosis and lipid mediator class switching in the resolution of inflammation. At the site of infection, resident macrophages initiate an inflammatory response, secreting proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines that alert the immune system and promote neutrophil recruitment. In the early stages of inflammation, microbes trigger the production of proinflammatory lipid mediators, such as leukotrienes and prostaglandins, which also recruit neutrophils. As inflammation progresses, a switch occurs, and anti-inflammatory lipid mediators such as lipoxins, resolvins, and protectins are produced. Notably, interaction of neutrophils with platelets induces the production of lipoxins. Anti-inflammatory lipid mediators initiate the resolution of inflammation by blocking neutrophil and promoting monocyte recruitment. Monocytes differentiated into macrophages ingest apoptotic neutrophils, driving the production of the anti-inflammatory cytokines tumor growth factor (TGF)β and IL-10 and prostaglandin-E2 (PGE-2), which drive the lipid mediator class switch. Proresolving lipid mediators also promote the expression of CCR5 on the surface of apoptotic neutrophils, providing a means of scavenging chemokines. Chemokine clearance upon phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils by macrophages further contributes to the reduction of neutrophil infiltration and the return to tissue homeostasis. The contribution of macrophages to the clearance of NETotic neutrophils, and how this could impact inflammation resolution, is currently unknown. A timeline of the inflammation process from initiation to resolution is summarized in the upper part of the figure.

lipoxins also impact neutrophil activation by inhibiting ROS and peroxynitrite production, NF- B activation, and IL-8 expression (170). κ

In addition to directly impacting neutrophil functions, lipid mediators promote nonphlogistic (noninflammatory) phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils by monocytes and macrophages. In the presence of antiinflammatory lipids, engulfment of apoptotic neutrophils is not accompanied by the release of proinflammatory mediators, as typically occurs duringmacrophageactivation.Instead, production of the anti-inflammatory cytokines TGFβ and IL-10 is increased (163, 171).

## Disorders Associated with Nonresolved Inflammation

The failure of neutrophils to apoptose or malfunctions in the removal of their apoptotic remains result in chronic inflammation. These conditions lead to the accumulation of cytotoxic substances and are associated with severe pathologies, including cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The severity of inflammation often directly correlates with poor clinical outcome.

COPD is a major cause of death in industrialized nations, where smoking is a prime

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): lung disease caused by noxious particles or gas, e.g., tobacco smoking; inflammation leads to lung obstruction

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA): chronic inflammatory disease that affects many tissues and organs but primarily synovial joints; severe inflammation causes deformity

instigator of this disease. A chronic neutrophil infiltration in the lungs of COPD patients promotes tissue damage and organ dysfunction. One of the key molecules controlling the inflammatory response in the lung is leukotriene A4 hydrolase (LTA4H). This enzyme has two opposing activities. First, its hydrolase activity converts leukotriene A4 into leukotriene B4, a potent neutrophil chemoattractant and proinflammatory agent. Second, LTA4H is an aminopeptidase that inactivates a specific neutrophil chemoattractant, the proline-glycine-proline tripeptide (PGP), thus conferring the enzyme with anti-inflammatory properties. Interestingly, tobacco smoke selectively inhibits only the aminopeptidase activity of LTA4H, promoting the accumulation of both leukotriene B4 and PGP. This in turn promotes neutrophil recruitment and fuels chronic lung inflammation (172).

Another prime example of a disease linked to nonresolving inflammation is RA. Neutrophils are the most abundant leukocytes present in the synovial fluid of RA patients, and their role in pathogenesis has been demonstrated in several animal models. These models primarily used neutrophil depletion or adoptive transfer of wild-type neutrophils in leukotriene-deficient mice (173-175). In one model, synthesis of leukotriene B4 by neutrophils in joints is essential for disease development (174). Leukotriene B4 can act in an autocrine manner via the neutrophil receptor BLT1 to promote the recruitment of a first wave of neutrophils into the joint. Later, the recruitment of a second wave of neutrophils is independent of this leukotriene B4-BLT1 pathway. At this stage, immune complexes are essential for stimulating infiltrating neutrophils to deliver IL-1 β into the joint. This in turn induces the production of chemokines by synovial tissue cells and sustains neutrophil recruitment (175, 176). These studies exemplify the complex regulation cascades involving lipids, cytokines, and chemokines that orchestrate neutrophil recruitment in chronic inflammation. They also demonstrate the cross talk between neutrophils and other immune cells discussed in

the previous section. It is, however, unknown whether all neutrophils are capable of adapting to the changing chemoattractant environment or if different subsets of neutrophils are successively involved. The relevance of this model in human disease remains to be established, although the clinical similarities between this mouse model and human RA are encouraging.

## NEUTROPHILS IN DISEASE

Neutrophils are prominent players in the innate immune response and the clearance of infection, a subject addressed in several prominent reviews. However, neutrophil action can also support disease progression in other illnesses. A host of autoimmune disorders belong to this category. In addition, certain malignant cancers are also prime examples of illnesses in which neutrophils play a salient role.

## Cancer

The link between cancer and inflammation was noted as early as 1863 by Rudolf Virchow (177). Since then, it has been proposed that neutrophil-derived ROS have the potential to initiate tumor formation by genotoxic stress and induction of genomic instability. Although this has been demonstrated in vitro (178, 179), convincing evidence for PMN-mediated DNA mutagenesis in vivo is still lacking. Neutrophils do, however, impact cancer progression. They are abundant in tumors and influence tumor development through several secreted mediators, including cytokines, ROS, and matrix-degrading proteases (reviewed in Reference 180). The majority of findings support a 'protumor' and 'antihost' effect of these cells; clinical studies indicate that neutrophil infiltration of tumors is associated with poorer prognosis (181, 182). Indeed, some cancers seem to actively recruit neutrophils through production of IL-8 (183). In agreement with this, antibody depletion of neutrophils reduces tumor growth (184). The protumor function of neutrophils operates at multiple levels, including production of angiogenic factors (185), enhancement of metastasis (186), and

suppression of the antitumor immune response (119, 187). Using the anti-Ly6G antibody, Fridlender and colleagues (187) depleted neutrophils and confirmed their tumorigenic role. Moreover, the study showed that neutrophils in the tumor microenvironment could, under certain circumstances, be induced to target their cytotoxic arsenal at tumor cells, whose growth they usually help to fuel. Pharmacological inhibition of TGFβ signaling led tumorassociated neutrophils to assume a heightened proinflammatory state, causing a reduction in tumor growth. These alternatively activated neutrophils underwent a complete reversal in their effect on CD8 + Tcells, serving to activate rather than suppress these cells. Differential neutrophil responses were also demonstrated in a melanoma study. In this instance, increased systemic levels of the acute-phase protein serum amyloid A (SAA-1) induced neutrophils to secrete the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL10, which also inhibited T cell responses. Cross talk with invariant NKT cells could counter this response, restoring a proinflammatory activation status (188). Thus, investigation of neutrophils in cancer has revealed considerable plasticity in their responses. Although little evidence currently supports the existence of different populations, it is likely that neutrophil responses are more flexible and less stereotyped than previously thought.

Another major mechanism of tumor escape from immune control has recently been attributed to a heterogeneous category of immature myeloid cells, called myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) (189). In healthy individuals, MDSCs are found in the bone marrow, where they differentiate into mature neutrophils and monocytes. In cancer and some autoimmune and infectious diseases, differentiation is partially blocked, leading to accumulation of these precursors, which act as powerful suppressors of T cell functions. MDSCs have characteristics of neutrophils, and in mice, they are typically detected using the neutrophil surface markers CD11b + and Gr-1 + , although they consist of variable proportions of monocytic and granulocytic cells (189). In

human renal cell carcinoma, MDSCs have identical morphology and express the same surface markers as do activated neutrophils (190, 191). MDSCs inhibit T cell proliferation by limiting L-arginine availability via arginase and NOS activities, both of which use this amino acid as a substrate (189, 191, 192). Furthermore, MDSCs are strong producers of ROS, which suppresses T cell responses (119, 192). Interfering with the release of MDSCs or using drug interventions to polarize neutrophil responses in the tumor microenvironment could represent novel therapeutic strategies against cancer.

## Autoimmunity

Deregulated neutrophil cell death and/or clearance often accompanies autoimmune syndromes (193-195) and may play a major role in disease pathogenesis, given that release of proteolytic and cytotoxic molecules from neutrophils can trigger organ damage. Neutrophil products act as both targets and mediators of autoimmunity. MPO and PR3 are the main targets of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), autoantibodies directed against antigens present in the cytoplasm of neutrophils. Wegener's granulomatosis is consistently associated with the presence of ANCA. Furthermore, the extent of organ damage in patients with Wegener's granulomatosis correlates with the PMN infiltrate rather than with traditional autoimmunity parameters such as T cell activation or autoantibody titers (196). Likewise, ANCA bind MPO and PR3 expressed on the surface of activated neutrophils, promoting degranulation and release of chemoattractants and ROS, which together lead to a vicious cycle of tissue damage and inflammation. Early reports also suggest that, in an inflammatory environment, ANCA accelerate ROS-dependent neutrophil apoptosis, suggesting a feed-forward cycle culminating in organ damage (194, 195).

SLEis another chronic autoimmune disease affecting multiple tissues and organs. Autoantibodies produced in SLE are predominantly either ANCA or directed against chromatin. Although neutrophils had long been suspected

Acute-phase proteins: secreted by liver, concentration in plasma changes by 25% or more during inflammation

## Vasculitis:

inflammation of blood vessels

to be causative agents, their role in SLE pathogenesis remained elusive. The recent discovery of a link between SLE and NET formation has helped to shed light on this quandary. It was proposed that TNFα and IFNα prime cells for NET formation in response to anti-PR3, antiribonucleoprotein, anti-HNP, or anti-LL-37 autoantibodies (103, 104, 106). Thus, high levels of inflammatory cytokines in autoimmune patients are believed to sensitize neutrophils to NETosis, whereas autoantibodies may trigger a switch from apoptosis to NETosis. Additional evidence suggesting a role for NETs in autoimmune pathology was obtained when NETs were identified in renal and/or skin biopsies from patients with SLE and small vessel vasculitis (103-106). Several studies have reported the presence of a particular subset of neutrophils in PBMC preparations from pediatric and adult SLE patients. These low-density granulocytes display phenotypic characteristics of immature neutrophils with nonsegmented nuclei and higher expression of MPO, NE, and defensin-3, and they may be related to the MDSCs discussed previously (see section on Cancer, above) (197, 198). An increased capacity to form NETs and a heightened cytotoxicity toward endothelial cells could bestow them with pathogenic properties in lupus (105).

Because NETs appear to be formed during autoimmune disease, their timely removal may be an essential mechanism for maintaining tissue homeostasis. Human serum contains the nuclease DNase I, which degrades NETs in vitro. Notably, a familial form of SLE is linked to a mutation in DNase I (199). Furthermore, in a cohort of SLE patients, 36% exhibited either elevated titers of autoantibodies directed against NET components or inhibitors of DNase I, both of which may protect NETs from degradation. Most notably, impaired NETdegradation correlates with development of lupus nephritis, one of the most severe manifestations of SLE (102).

Can it be that NETs play a general role in modulation of autoimmune responses? We know that NETs induce plasmacytoid DCs

to produce IFNα , a central cytokine in SLE pathogenesis (103, 104). However, it remains to be determined if DCs can present NET components or if they contribute to autoreactive B cell activation. It is also possible that NETs are involved in other autoimmune diseases. Should this prove to be the case, understanding the role of NETs may provide critical insights into the role of microbial infections as a trigger of autoimmunity.

## CONCLUDING REMARKS

Neutrophils are specialized phagocytes that arose as an evolutionary adaptation in vertebrates to coordinate and execute one of the most fundamental physiological responses: inflammation. They are endowed with antimicrobial mechanisms that make them the preeminent microbe exterminators of the immune system. In addition to this important role, PMNs also network with many other immune cells and help regulate the initiation of specific T and B cell immunity. However, neutrophils do not always act in ways beneficial to the host: Uncontrolled neutrophil responses can exacerbate and even cause autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Many challenges remain in understanding neutrophil function: Is there specialization among PMNs? Are they more plastic than we suspect? How do they make decisions before deploying their armamentaria? How do they kill microbes? How specific are their instructions to other cells? Answering these questions will better define neutrophils' role in defense and disease and will provide a rational path for pursuing new therapies. Moreover, neutrophils can potentially provide insights into several unique aspects of basic cell biology. Their strikingly short life spans make them excellent models for investigating cell death, whereas their reliance on ROS as biochemical effectors may reveal novel ways for relaying intracellular signals. The uniquely lobulated neutrophil nucleus is a feat of higher-order nuclear architecture that is just beginning to yield its secrets. In short, exciting times await the humble neutrophil.

## DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Diane Schad for assistance with graphic design and Cornelia Heinz for administrative help. G.H. is an Alexander von Humboldt Foundation Scholar, and B.A. is supported by an EMBO Long-Term Fellowship.

## LITERATURE CITED

- 1. Ehrlich P. 1880. Methodologische Beitrage zur Physiologie und Pathologie der verschiedenen Formen der Leukocyten. Z. Klin. Med. 1:553-60
- 2. Waller A. 1846. Microscopic observation on the perforation of capillaries by the corpuscles of blood and the origin of mucus and pus globules. Lond. Edinburgh Philos. Mag. J. Sci. 2:271-80
- 3. Metchnikoff E. 1893. Lecon sur la pathologie comparee de inflammation. Ann. Inst. Pasteur 7:348-57
- 4. Nathan C. 2006. Neutrophils and immunity: challenges and opportunities. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 6:173-82
- 5. Borregaard N. 2010. Neutrophils, from marrow to microbes. Immunity 33:657-70
- 6. Borregaard N, Cowland JB. 1997. Granules of the human neutrophilic polymorphonuclear leukocyte. Blood 89:3503-21
- 7. Finger EB, Puri KD, Alon R, Lawrence MB, von Andrian UH, Springer TA. 1996. Adhesion through L-selectin requires a threshold hydrodynamic shear. Nature 379:266-69
- 8. Lawrence MB, Kansas GS, Kunkel EJ, Ley K. 1997. Threshold levels of fluid shear promote leukocyte adhesion through selectins (CD62L,P,E). J. Cell Biol. 136:717-27
- 9. Kansas GS. 1996. Selectins and their ligands: current concepts and controversies. Blood 88:3259-87
- 10. McEver RP, Cummings RD. 1997. Role of PSGL-1 binding to selectins in leukocyte recruitment. J. Clin. Investig. 100:S97-103
- 11. Yago T, Shao B, Miner JJ, Yao L, Klopocki AG, et al. 2010. E-selectin engages PSGL-1 and CD44 through a common signaling pathway to induce integrin α β L 2-mediated slow leukocyte rolling. Blood 116:485-94
- 12. Mueller H, Stadtmann A, Van Aken H, Hirsch E, Wang D, et al. 2010. Tyrosine kinase Btk regulates E-selectin-mediated integrin activation and neutrophil recruitment by controlling phospholipase C (PLC) γ 2 and PI3K γ pathways. Blood 115:3118-27
- 13. LeyK,LaudannaC,CybulskyMI,NoursharghS.2007.Gettingtothesiteofinflammation:theleukocyte adhesion cascade updated. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7:678-89
- 14. Campbell JJ, Hedrick J, Zlotnik A, Siani MA, Thompson DA, Butcher EC. 1998. Chemokines and the arrest of lymphocytes rolling under flow conditions. Science 279:381-84
- 15. Constantin G, Majeed M, Giagulli C, Piccio L, Kim JY, et al. 2000. Chemokines trigger immediate β 2 integrin affinity and mobility changes: differential regulation and roles in lymphocyte arrest under flow. Immunity 13:759-69
- 16. Liu S, Kiosses WB, Rose DM, Slepak M, Salgia R, et al. 2002. A fragment of paxillin binds the α 4 integrin cytoplasmic domain (tail) and selectively inhibits α 4-mediated cell migration. J. Biol. Chem. 277:20887-94
- 17. Goldfinger LE, Han J, Kiosses WB, Howe AK, Ginsberg MH. 2003. Spatial restriction of α 4 integrin phosphorylation regulates lamellipodial stability and α β 4 1-dependent cell migration. J. Cell Biol. 162:731-41
- 18. XuJ, Wang F, Van Keymeulen A, Herzmark P, Straight A, et al. 2003. Divergent signals and cytoskeletal assemblies regulate self-organizing polarity in neutrophils. Cell 114:201-14
- 19. Schenkel AR, Chew TW, Muller WA. 2004. Platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule deficiency or blockade significantly reduces leukocyte emigration in a majority of mouse strains. J. Immunol. 173:64038

- 20. Phillipson M, Heit B, Colarusso P, Liu L, Ballantyne CM, Kubes P. 2006. Intraluminal crawling of neutrophils to emigration sites: a molecularly distinct process from adhesion in the recruitment cascade. J. Exp. Med. 203:2569-75
- 21. Wong CH, Heit B, Kubes P. 2010. Molecular regulators of leucocyte chemotaxis during inflammation. Cardiovasc. Res. 86:183-91
- 22. Zarbock A, Ley K. 2008. Mechanisms and consequences of neutrophil interaction with the endothelium. Am. J. Pathol. 172:1-7
- 23. Selvatici R, Falzarano S, Mollica A, Spisani S. 2006. Signal transduction pathways triggered by selective formylpeptide analogues in human neutrophils. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 534:1-11
- 24. Chen Y, Yao Y, Sumi Y, Li A, To UK, et al. 2010. Purinergic signaling: a fundamental mechanism in neutrophil activation. Sci. Signal. 3:ra45
- 25. Sabroe I, Dower SK, Whyte MK. 2005. The role of Toll-like receptors in the regulation of neutrophil migration, activation, and apoptosis. Clin. Infect. Dis. 41(Suppl. 7):S421-26
- 26. Parker LC, Whyte MK, Dower SK, Sabroe I. 2005. The expression and roles of Toll-like receptors in the biology of the human neutrophil. J. Leukoc. Biol. 77:886-92
- 27. Ley K. 2002. Integration of inflammatory signals by rolling neutrophils. Immunol. Rev. 186:8-18
- 28. Guthrie LA, McPhail LC, Henson PM, Johnston RB Jr. 1984. Priming of neutrophils for enhanced release of oxygen metabolites by bacterial lipopolysaccharide. Evidence for increased activity of the superoxide-producing enzyme. J. Exp. Med. 160:1656-71
- 29. El-Benna J, Dang PM, Gougerot-Pocidalo MA. 2008. Priming of the neutrophil NADPH oxidase activation: role of p47phox phosphorylation and NOX2 mobilization to the plasma membrane. Semin. Immunopathol. 30:279-89
- 30. Didsbury JR, Uhing RJ, Tomhave E, Gerard C, Gerard N, Snyderman R. 1991. Receptor class desensitization of leukocyte chemoattractant receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88:11564-68
- 31. Claing A, Laporte SA, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. 2002. Endocytosis of G protein-coupled receptors: roles of G protein-coupled receptor kinases and β -arrestin proteins. Prog. Neurobiol. 66:61-79
- 32. Nusse O, Lindau M. 1988. The dynamics of exocytosis in human neutrophils. J. Cell Biol. 107:2117-23
- 33. Lacy P. 2005. The role of Rho GTPases and SNAREs in mediator release from granulocytes. Pharmacol. Ther. 107:358-76
- 34. Faurschou M, Borregaard N. 2003. Neutrophil granules and secretory vesicles in inflammation. Microbes Infect. 5:1317-27
- 35. Faurschou M, Borregaard N. 2003. Neutrophil granules and secretory vesicles in inflammation. Microbes Infect. 5:1317-27
- 36. Borregaard N, Sorensen OE, Theilgaard-Monch K. 2007. Neutrophil granules: a library of innate immunity proteins. Trends Immunol. 28:340-45
- 37. Borregaard N, Kjeldsen L, Lollike K, Sengelov H. 1992. Ca 2 + -dependent translocation of cytosolic proteins to isolated granule subpopulations and plasma membrane from human neutrophils. FEBS Lett. 304:195-97
- 38. Borregaard N, Kjeldsen L, Sengelov H, Diamond MS, Springer TA, et al. 1994. Changes in subcellular localization and surface expression of L-selectin, alkaline phosphatase, and Mac-1 in human neutrophils during stimulation with inflammatory mediators. J. Leukoc. Biol. 56:80-87
- 39. Sengelov H, Kjeldsen L, Borregaard N. 1993. Control of exocytosis in early neutrophil activation. J. Immunol. 150:1535-43
- 40. Kjeldsen L, Bjerrum OW, Askaa J, Borregaard N. 1992. Subcellular localization and release of human neutrophil gelatinase, confirming the existence of separate gelatinase-containing granules. Biochem. J. 287(Pt. 2):603-10
- 41. Kjeldsen L, Bainton DF, Sengelov H, Borregaard N. 1993. Structural and functional heterogeneity among peroxidase-negative granules in human neutrophils: identification of a distinct gelatinasecontaining granule subset by combined immunocytochemistry and subcellular fractionation. Blood 82:3183-91
- 42. Faurschou M, Sorensen OE, Johnsen AH, Askaa J, Borregaard N. 2002. Defensin-rich granules of human neutrophils: characterization of secretory properties. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res. 1591:29-35

- 43. Delclaux C, Delacourt C, D'Ortho MP, Boyer V, Lafuma C, Harf A. 1996. Role of gelatinase B and elastase in human polymorphonuclear neutrophil migration across basement membrane. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 14:288-95
- 44. Singer II, Scott S, Kawka DW, Kazazis DM. 1989. Adhesomes: specific granules containing receptors for laminin, C3bi/fibrinogen, fibronectin, and vitronectin in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes. J. Cell Biol. 109:3169-82
- 45. Jesaitis AJ, Buescher ES, Harrison D, Quinn MT, Parkos CA, et al. 1990. Ultrastructural localization of cytochrome b in the membranes of resting and phagocytosing human granulocytes. J. Clin. Investig. 85:821-35
- 46. Soehnlein O, Zernecke A, Weber C. 2009. Neutrophils launch monocyte extravasation by release of granule proteins. Thromb. Haemost. 102:198-205
- 47. Brogden KA. 2005. Antimicrobial peptides: pore formers or metabolic inhibitors in bacteria? Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3:238-50
- 48. Schroeder BO, Wu Z, Nuding S, Groscurth S, Marcinowski M, et al. 2011. Reduction of disulphide bonds unmasks potent antimicrobial activity of human β -defensin 1. Nature 469:419-23
- 49. Schneider T, Kruse T, Wimmer R, Wiedemann I, Sass V, et al. 2010. Plectasin, a fungal defensin, targets the bacterial cell wall precursor Lipid II. Science 328:1168-72
- 50. Lande R, Gregorio J, Facchinetti V, Chatterjee B, Wang YH, et al. 2007. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells sense self-DNA coupled with antimicrobial peptide. Nature 449:564-69
- 51. Canny G, Levy O. 2008. Bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) and BPI homologs at mucosal sites. Trends. Immunol. 29:541-47
- 52. Hirsch JG. 1958. Bactericidal action of histone. J. Exp. Med. 108:925-44
- 53. Park CB, Yi KS, Matsuzaki K, Kim MS, Kim SC. 2000. Structure-activity analysis of buforin II, a histone H2A-derived antimicrobial peptide: the proline hinge is responsible for the cell-penetrating ability of buforin II. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97:8245-50
- 54. Markart P, Korfhagen TR, Weaver TE, Akinbi HT. 2004. Mouse lysozyme M is important in pulmonary host defense against Klebsiella pneumoniae infection. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 169:454-58
- 55. NashJA,BallardTN,WeaverTE,AkinbiHT.2006.Thepeptidoglycan-degradingpropertyoflysozyme is not required for bactericidal activity in vivo. J. Immunol. 177:519-26
- 56. Weinrauch Y, Drujan D, Shapiro SD, Weiss J, Zychlinsky A. 2002. Neutrophil elastase targets virulence factors of enterobacteria. Nature 417:91-94
- 57. Belaaouaj A, McCarthy R, Baumann M, Gao Z, Ley TJ, et al. 1998. Mice lacking neutrophil elastase reveal impaired host defense against gram negative bacterial sepsis. Nat. Med. 4:615-18
- 58. Tkalcevic J, Novelli M, Phylactides M, Iredale JP, Segal AW, Roes J. 2000. Impaired immunity and enhanced resistance to endotoxin in the absence of neutrophil elastase and cathepsin G. Immunity 12:20110
- 59. Campanelli D, Detmers PA, Nathan CF, Gabay JE. 1990. Azurocidin and a homologous serine protease from neutrophils. Differential antimicrobial and proteolytic properties. J. Clin. Investig. 85:904-15
- 60. Corbin BD, Seeley EH, Raab A, Feldmann J, Miller MR, et al. 2008. Metal chelation and inhibition of bacterial growth in tissue abscesses. Science 319:962-65
- 61. Weinberg ED. 1975. Nutritional immunity. Host's attempt to withhold iron from microbial invaders. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 231:39-41
- 62. HamptonMB,KettleAJ,Winterbourn CC. 1998. Inside the neutrophil phagosome: oxidants, myeloperoxidase, and bacterial killing. Blood 92:3007-17
- 63. Bogdan C, Rollinghoff M, Diefenbach A. 2000. Reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen intermediates in innate and specific immunity. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 12:64-76
- 64. Winterbourn CC. 2008. Reconciling the chemistry and biology of reactive oxygen species. Nat. Chem. Biol. 4:278-86
- 65. Winterbourn CC, Hampton MB, Livesey JH, Kettle AJ. 2006. Modeling the reactions of superoxide and myeloperoxidase in the neutrophil phagosome: implications for microbial killing. J. Biol. Chem. 281:39860-69
- 66. Segal BH, Leto TL, Gallin JI, Malech HL, Holland SM. 2000. Genetic, biochemical, and clinical features of chronic granulomatous disease. Medicine 79:170-200

- 67. Seger RA. 2010. Chronic granulomatous disease: recent advances in pathophysiology and treatment. Neth. J. Med. 68:334-40
- 68. Klebanoff SJ. 2005. Myeloperoxidase: friend and foe. J. Leukoc. Biol. 77:598-625
- 69. Nauseef WM. 2007. How human neutrophils kill and degrade microbes: an integrated view. Immunol. Rev. 219:88-102
- 70. Kutter D. 1998. Prevalence of myeloperoxidase deficiency: population studies using Bayer-Technicon automated hematology. J. Mol. Med. 76:669-75
- 71. Kuhns DB, Alvord WG, Heller T, Feld JJ, Pike KM, et al. 2010. Residual NADPH oxidase and survival in chronic granulomatous disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 363:2600-10
- 72. Nathan C. 2003. Specificity of a third kind: reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates in cell signaling. J. Clin. Investig. 111:769-78
- 73. Johnson D, Travis J. 1979. Oxidative inactivation of human α -1-proteinase inhibitor - further evidence for methionine at the reactive center. J. Biol. Chem. 254:4022-26
- 74. Shao BH, Belaaouaj A, Verlinde C, Fu XY, Heinecke JW. 2005. Methionine sulfoxide and proteolytic cleavage contribute to the inactivation of cathepsin G by hypochlorous acid-an oxidative mechanism for regulation of serine proteinases by myeloperoxidase. J. Biol. Chem. 280:29311-21
- 75. Reeves EP, Lu H, Lortat-Jacob H, Messina CGM, Bolsover S, et al. 2002. Killing activity of neutrophils is mediated through activation of proteases by K + flux. Nature 416:291-97
- 76. Murphy MP, Holmgren A, Larsson NG, Halliwell B, Chang CJ, et al. 2011. Unraveling the biological roles of reactive oxygen species. Cell Metab. 13:361-66
- 77. Underhill DM, Ozinsky A. 2002. Phagocytosis of microbes: complexity in action. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 20:825-52
- 78. Segal AW, Geisow M, Garcia R, Harper A, Miller R. 1981. The respiratory burst of phagocytic cells is associated with a rise in vacuolar pH. Nature 290:406-9
- 79. Jankowski A, Scott CC, Grinstein S. 2002. Determinants of the phagosomal pH in neutrophils. J. Biol. Chem. 277:6059-66
- 80. Lee WL, Harrison RE, Grinstein S. 2003. Phagocytosis by neutrophils. Microbes Infect. 5:1299-306
- 81. Luong TT, Lee CY. 2002. Overproduction of type 8 capsular polysaccharide augments Staphylococcus aureus virulence. Infect. Immun. 70:3389-95
- 82. Allen LA, Beecher BR, Lynch JT, Rohner OV, Wittine LM. 2005. Helicobacter pylori disrupts NADPH oxidase targeting in human neutrophils to induce extracellular superoxide release. J. Immunol. 174:365867
- 83. McCaffrey RL, Schwartz JT, Lindemann SR, Moreland JG, Buchan BW, et al. 2010. Multiple mechanisms of NADPH oxidase inhibition by type A and type B Francisella tularensis . J. Leukoc. Biol. 88:791-805
- 84. Joiner KA, Ganz T, Albert J, Rotrosen D. 1989. The opsonizing ligand on Salmonella typhimurium influences incorporation of specific, but not azurophil, granule constituents into neutrophil phagosomes. J. Cell Biol. 109:2771-82
- 85. Staali L, Bauer S, Morgelin M, Bjorck L, Tapper H. 2006. Streptococcus pyogenes bacteria modulate membrane traffic in human neutrophils and selectively inhibit azurophilic granule fusion with phagosomes. Cell. Microbiol. 8:690-703
- 86. Brinkmann V, Reichard U, Goosmann C, Fauler B, Uhlemann Y, et al. 2004. Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria. Science 303:1532-35
- 87. Fuchs TA, Abed U, Goosmann C, Hurwitz R, Schulze I, et al. 2007. Novel cell death program leads to neutrophil extracellular traps. J. Cell Biol. 176:231-41
- 88. Urban CF, Ermert D, Schmid M, Abu-Abed U, Goosmann C, et al. 2009. Neutrophil extracellular traps contain calprotectin, a cytosolic protein complex involved in host defense against Candida albicans . PLoS Pathog. 5:e1000639
- 89. Papayannopoulos V, Zychlinsky A. 2009. NETs: a new strategy for using old weapons. Trends Immunol. 30:513-21
- 90. Patel S, Kumar S, Jyoti A, Srinag BS, Keshari RS, et al. 2010. Nitric oxide donors release extracellular traps from human neutrophils by augmenting free radical generation. Nitric Oxide 22:226-34
- 91. Metzler KD, Fuchs TA, Nauseef WM, Reumaux D, Roesler J, et al. 2011. Myeloperoxidase is required for neutrophil extracellular trap formation: implications for innate immunity. Blood 117:953-59

- 92. Pilsczek FH, Salina D, Poon KKH, Fahey C, Yipp BG, et al. 2010. A novel mechanism of rapid nuclear neutrophil extracellular trap formation in response to Staphylococcus aureus . J. Immunol. 185:7413-25
- 93. Hakkim A, Fuchs TA, Martinez NE, Hess S, Prinz H, et al. 2011. Activation of the Raf-MEK-ERK pathway is required for neutrophil extracellular trap formation. Nat. Chem. Biol. 7:75-77
- 94. Papayannopoulos V, Metzler KD, Hakkim A, Zychlinsky A. 2010. Neutrophil elastase and myeloperoxidase regulate the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps. J. Cell Biol. 191:677-91
- 95. Neeli I, Khan SN, Radic M. 2008. Histone deimination as a response to inflammatory stimuli in neutrophils. J. Immunol. 180:1895-902
- 96. Wang Y, Li M, Stadler S, Correll S, Li P, et al. 2009. Histone hypercitrullination mediates chromatin decondensation and neutrophil extracellular trap formation. J. Cell Biol. 184:205-13
- 97. Li P, Li M, Lindberg MR, Kennett MJ, Xiong N, Wang Y. 2010. PAD4 is essential for antibacterial innate immunity mediated by neutrophil extracellular traps. J. Exp. Med. 207:1853-62
- 98. Remijsen Q, Vanden Berghe T, Wirawan E, Asselbergh B, Parthoens E, et al. 2011. Neutrophil extracellular trap cell death requires both autophagy and superoxide generation. Cell Res. 21:290-304
- 99. Beiter K, Wartha F, Albiger B, Normark S, Zychlinsky A, Henriques-Normark B. 2006. An endonuclease allows Streptococcus pneumoniae to escape from neutrophil extracellular traps. Curr. Biol. 16:401-7
- 100. Buchanan JT, Simpson AJ, Aziz RK, Liu GY, Kristian SA, et al. 2006. DNase expression allows the pathogen group A Streptococcus to escape killing in neutrophil extracellular traps. Curr. Biol. 16:396-400
- 101. Bianchi M, Hakkim A, Brinkmann V, Siler U, Seger RA, et al. 2009. Restoration of NET formation by gene therapy in CGD controls aspergillosis. Blood 114:2619-22
- 102. Hakkim A, Furnrohr BG, Amann K, Laube B, Abed UA, et al. 2010. Impairment of neutrophil extracellular trap degradation is associated with lupus nephritis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107:9813-18
- 103. Garcia-Romo GS, Caielli S, Vega B, Connolly J, Allantaz F, et al. 2011. Netting neutrophils are major inducers of type I IFN production in pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus. Sci. Transl. Med. 3:73ra20
- 104. Lande R, Ganguly D, Facchinetti V, Frasca L, Conrad C, et al. 2011. Neutrophils activate plasmacytoid dendritic cells by releasing self-DNA-peptide complexes in systemic lupus erythematosus. Sci. Transl. Med. 3:73ra19
- 105. Villanueva E, Yalavarthi S, Berthier CC, Hodgin JB, Khandpur R, et al. 2011. Netting neutrophils induce endothelial damage, infiltrate tissues, and expose immunostimulatory molecules in systemic lupus erythematosus. J. Immunol. 187:538-52
- 106. Kessenbrock K, Krumbholz M, Schonermarck U, Back W, Gross WL, et al. 2009. Netting neutrophils in autoimmune small-vessel vasculitis. Nat. Med. 15:623-25
- 107. Clark SR, Ma AC, Tavener SA, McDonald B, Goodarzi Z, et al. 2007. Platelet TLR4 activates neutrophil extracellular traps to ensnare bacteria in septic blood. Nat. Med. 13:463-69
- 108. Fuchs TA, Brill A, Duerschmied D, Schatzberg D, Monestier M, et al. 2010. Extracellular DNA traps promote thrombosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107:15880-85
- 109. Marcos V, Zhou Z, Yildirim AO, Bohla A, Hector A, et al. 2010. CXCR2 mediates NADPH oxidaseindependent neutrophil extracellular trap formation in cystic fibrosis airway inflammation. Nat. Med. 16:1018-23
- 110. Subrahmanyam YV, Yamaga S, Prashar Y, Lee HH, Hoe NP, et al. 2001. RNA expression patterns change dramatically in human neutrophils exposed to bacteria. Blood 97:2457-68
- 111. Kobayashi SD, Voyich JM, Buhl CL, Stahl RM, DeLeo FR. 2002. Global changes in gene expression by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes during receptor-mediated phagocytosis: Cell fate is regulated at the level of gene expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:6901-6
- 112. Meyer-Hoffert U, Wiedow O. 2010. Neutrophil serine proteases: mediators of innate immune responses. Curr. Opin. Hematol. 18:19-24
- 113. Scapini P, Lapinet-Vera JA, Gasperini S, Calzetti F, Bazzoni F, Cassatella MA. 2000. The neutrophil as a cellular source of chemokines. Immunol. Rev. 177:195-203
- 114. Sica A, Matsushima K, Van Damme J, Wang JM, Polentarutti N, et al. 1990. IL-1 transcriptionally activates the neutrophil chemotactic factor/IL-8 gene in endothelial cells. Immunology 69:548-53
- 115. Kasama T, Miwa Y, Isozaki T, Odai T, Adachi M, Kunkel SL. 2005. Neutrophil-derived cytokines: potential therapeutic targets in inflammation. Curr. Drug Targets Inflamm. Allergy 4:273-9

- 116. Scapini P, Lapinet-Vera JA, Gasperini S, Calzetti F, Bazzoni F, Cassatella MA. 2000. The neutrophil as a cellular source of chemokines. Immunol. Rev. 177:195-203
- 117. Yang D, de la Rosa G, Tewary P, Oppenheim JJ. 2009. Alarmins link neutrophils and dendritic cells. Trends Immunol. 30:531-37
- 118. Serhan CN. 2007. Resolution phase of inflammation: novel endogenous anti-inflammatory and proresolving lipid mediators and pathways. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 25:101-37
- 119. Schmielau J, Finn OJ. 2001. Activated granulocytes and granulocyte-derived hydrogen peroxide are the underlying mechanism of suppression of t-cell function in advanced cancer patients. Cancer Res. 61:4756-60
- 120. van Gisbergen KP, Sanchez-Hernandez M, Geijtenbeek TB, van Kooyk Y. 2005. Neutrophils mediate immune modulation of dendritic cells through glycosylation-dependent interactions between Mac-1 and DC-SIGN. J. Exp. Med. 201:1281-92
- 121. Cailhier JF, Partolina M, Vuthoori S, Wu S, Ko K, et al. 2005. Conditional macrophage ablation demonstrates that resident macrophages initiate acute peritoneal inflammation. J. Immunol. 174:2336-42
- 122. Yoshimura T, Takahashi M. 2007. IFNγ -mediated survival enables human neutrophils to produce MCP-1/CCL2 in response to activation by TLR ligands. J. Immunol. 179:1942-49
- 123. Katsura T, Kobayashi K, Hosaka M, Sugihara S, Kasama T, et al. 1993. Desensitization of delayed-type hypersensitivity in mice: suppressive environment. Med. Inflamm. 2:205-10
- 124. Scapini P, Laudanna C, Pinardi C, Allavena P, Mantovani A, et al. 2001. Neutrophils produce biologically active macrophage inflammatory protein-3 α (MIP-3 α )/CCL20 and MIP-3 β /CCL19. Eur. J. Immunol. 31:1981-88
- 125. Soehnlein O, Zernecke A, Eriksson EE, Rothfuchs AG, Pham CT, et al. 2008. Neutrophil secretion products pave the way for inflammatory monocytes. Blood 112:1461-71
- 126. De Y, Chen Q, Schmidt AP, Anderson GM, Wang JM, et al. 2000. LL-37, the neutrophil granuleand epithelial cell-derived cathelicidin, utilizes formyl peptide receptor-like 1 (FPRL1) as a receptor to chemoattract human peripheral blood neutrophils, monocytes, and T cells. J. Exp. Med. 192:1069-74
- 127. Chertov O, Ueda H, Xu LL, Tani K, Murphy WJ, et al. 1997. Identification of human neutrophilderived cathepsin G and azurocidin/CAP37 as chemoattractants for mononuclear cells and neutrophils. J. Exp. Med. 186:739-47
- 128. Soehnlein O, Weber C, Lindbom L. 2009. Neutrophil granule proteins tune monocytic cell function. Trends Immunol. 30:538-46
- 129. Soehnlein O, Kai-Larsen Y, Frithiof R, Sorensen OE, Kenne E, et al. 2008. Neutrophil primary granule proteins HBP and HNP1-3 boost bacterial phagocytosis by human and murine macrophages. J. Clin. Investig. 118:3491-502
- 130. Peters NC, Egen JG, Secundino N, Debrabant A, Kimblin N, et al. 2008. In vivo imaging reveals an essential role for neutrophils in Leishmaniasis transmitted by sand flies. Science 321:970-74
- 131. Charmoy M, Brunner-Agten S, Aebischer D, Auderset F, Launois P, et al. 2010. Neutrophil-derived CCL3is essential for the rapid recruitment of dendritic cells to the site of Leishmania major inoculation in resistant mice. PLoS Pathog. 6:e1000755
- 132. BennounaS,Bliss SK, Curiel TJ, Denkers EY. 2003. Cross-talk in the innate immune system: neutrophils instruct recruitment and activation of dendritic cells during microbial infection. J. Immunol. 171:6052-58
- 133. Daley JM, Thomay AA, Connolly MD, Reichner JS, Albina JE. 2008. Use of Ly6G-specific monoclonal antibody to deplete neutrophils in mice. J. Leukoc. Biol. 83:64-70
- 134. Blomgran R, Ernst JD. 2011. Lung neutrophils facilitate activation of naive antigen-specific CD4 + T cells during Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. J. Immunol. 186:7110-19
- 135. Yang CW, Strong BS, Miller MJ, Unanue ER. 2010. Neutrophils influence the level of antigen presentation during the immune response to protein antigens in adjuvants. J. Immunol. 185:2927-34
- 136. Chtanova T, Schaeffer M, Han SJ, van Dooren GG, Nollmann M, et al. 2008. Dynamics of neutrophil migration in lymph nodes during infection. Immunity 29:487-96
- 137. Sporri R, Joller N, Hilbi H, Oxenius A. 2008. A novel role for neutrophils as critical activators of NK cells. J. Immunol. 181:7121-30
- 138. Costantini C, Cassatella MA. 2011. The defensive alliance between neutrophils and NK cells as a novel arm of innate immunity. J. Leukoc. Biol. 89:221-33

- 139. Costantini C, Calzetti F, Perbellini O, Micheletti A, Scarponi C, et al. 2011. Human neutrophils interact with both 6-sulfo LacNAc + DC and NK cells to amplify NK-derived IFN γ : role of CD18, ICAM-1, and ICAM-3. Blood 117:1677-86
- 140. Muller I, Munder M, Kropf P, Hansch GM. 2009. Polymorphonuclear neutrophils and T lymphocytes: strange bedfellows or brothers in arms? Trends Immunol. 30:522-30
- 141. Romani L, Mencacci A, Cenci E, Spaccapelo R, Del Sero G, et al. 1997. Neutrophil production of IL-12 and IL-10 in candidiasis and efficacy of IL-12 therapy in neutropenic mice. J. Immunol. 158:5349-56
- 142. Tateda K, Moore TA, Deng JC, Newstead MW, Zeng X, et al. 2001. Early recruitment of neutrophils determines subsequent T1/T2 host responses in a murine model of Legionella pneumophila pneumonia. J. Immunol. 166:3355-61
- 143. Scapini P, Bazzoni F, Cassatella MA. 2008. Regulation of B-cell-activating factor (BAFF)/B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS) expression in human neutrophils. Immunol. Lett. 116:1-6
- 144. Huard B, McKee T, Bosshard C, Durual S, Matthes T, et al. 2008. APRIL secreted by neutrophils binds to heparan sulfate proteoglycans to create plasma cell niches in human mucosa. J. Clin. Investig. 118:2887-95
- 145. Ellis TN, Beaman BL. 2004. Interferonγ activation of polymorphonuclear neutrophil function. Immunology 112:2-12
- 146. Ouyang W, Kolls JK, Zheng Y. 2008. The biological functions of T helper 17 cell effector cytokines in inflammation. Immunity 28:454-67
- 147. MunderM,SchneiderH,LucknerC,GieseT,LanghansCD,etal.2006.SuppressionofT-cellfunctions by human granulocyte arginase. Blood 108:1627-34
- 148. Beauvillain C, Delneste Y, Scotet M, Peres A, Gascan H, et al. 2007. Neutrophils efficiently cross-prime naive T cells in vivo. Blood 110:2965-73
- 149. Gosselin EJ, Wardwell K, Rigby WF, Guyre PM. 1993. Induction of MHC class II on human polymorphonuclear neutrophils by granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor, IFNγ , and IL-3. J. Immunol. 151:1482-90
- 150. Mudzinski SP, Christian TP, Guo TL, Cirenza E, Hazlett KR, Gosselin EJ. 1995. Expression of HLADR (major histocompatibility complex class II) on neutrophils from patients treated with granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor for mobilization of stem cells. Blood 86:2452-53
- 151. Reinisch W, Lichtenberger C, Steger G, Tillinger W, Scheiner O, et al. 2003. Donor dependent, interferonγ induced HLA-DR expression on human neutrophils in vivo. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 133:47684
- 152. Fanger NA, Liu C, Guyre PM, Wardwell K, O'Neil J, et al. 1997. Activation of human T cells by major histocompatability complex class II expressing neutrophils: proliferation in the presence of superantigen, but not tetanus toxoid. Blood 89:4128-35
- 153. Radsak M, Iking-Konert C, Stegmaier S, Andrassy K, Hansch GM. 2000. Polymorphonuclear neutrophils as accessory cells for T-cell activation: major histocompatibility complex class II restricted antigen-dependent induction of T-cell proliferation. Immunology 101:521-30
- 154. Culshaw S, Millington OR, Brewer JM, McInnes IB. 2008. Murine neutrophils present Class II restricted antigen. Immunol. Lett. 118:49-54
- 155. Kennedy AD, DeLeo FR. 2009. Neutrophil apoptosis and the resolution of infection. Immunol. Res. 43:25-61
- 156. Altznauer F, Martinelli S, Yousefi S, Thurig C, Schmid I, et al. 2004. Inflammation-associated cell cycle-independent block of apoptosis by survivin in terminally differentiated neutrophils. J. Exp. Med. 199:1343-54
- 157. Rossi AG, Sawatzky DA, Walker A, Ward C, Sheldrake TA, et al. 2006. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors enhance the resolution of inflammation by promoting inflammatory cell apoptosis. Nat. Med. 12:1056-64
- 158. Witko-Sarsat V, Mocek J, Bouayad D, Tamassia N, Ribeil JA, et al. 2010. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen acts as a cytoplasmic platform controlling human neutrophil survival. J. Exp. Med. 207:2631-45
- 159. Arita M, Clish CB, Serhan CN. 2005. The contributions of aspirin and microbial oxygenase to the biosynthesis of anti-inflammatory resolvins: novel oxygenase products from omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 338:149-57

- 160. VanceRE,HongS,GronertK,SerhanCN,MekalanosJJ.2004.Theopportunisticpathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa carries a secretable arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101:2135-39
- 161. Devchand PR, Arita M, Hong S, Bannenberg G, Moussignac RL, et al. 2003. Human ALX receptor regulates neutrophil recruitment in transgenic mice: roles in inflammation and host defense. FASEB J. 17:652-59
- 162. Arita M, Ohira T, Sun YP, Elangovan S, Chiang N, Serhan CN. 2007. Resolvin E1 selectively interacts with leukotriene B4 receptor BLT1 and ChemR23 to regulate inflammation. J. Immunol. 178:3912-17
- 163. Schwab JM, Chiang N, Arita M, Serhan CN. 2007. Resolvin E1 and protectin D1 activate inflammationresolution programmes. Nature 447:869-74
- 164. Spite M, Norling LV, Summers L, Yang R, Cooper D, et al. 2009. Resolvin D2 is a potent regulator of leukocytes and controls microbial sepsis. Nature 461:1287-91
- 165. XuZZ,ZhangL,Liu T, Park JY, Berta T, et al. 2010. Resolvins RvE1 and RvD1 attenuate inflammatory pain via central and peripheral actions. Nat. Med. 16:592-97
- 166. Krishnamoorthy S, Recchiuti A, Chiang N, Yacoubian S, Lee CH, et al. 2010. Resolvin D1 binds human phagocytes with evidence for proresolving receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107:1660-65
- 167. Oh SF, Pillai PS, Recchiuti A, Yang R, Serhan CN. 2011. Pro-resolving actions and stereoselective biosynthesis of 18S E-series resolvins in human leukocytes and murine inflammation. J. Clin. Investig. 121:569-81
- 168. Ariel A, Fredman G, Sun YP, Kantarci A, Van Dyke TE, et al. 2006. Apoptotic neutrophils and T cells sequester chemokines during immune response resolution through modulation of CCR5 expression. Nat. Immunol. 7:1209-16
- 169. Filep JG, Zouki C, Petasis NA, Hachicha M, Serhan CN. 1999. Anti-inflammatory actions of lipoxin A(4) stable analogs are demonstrable in human whole blood: modulation of leukocyte adhesion molecules and inhibition of neutrophil-endothelial interactions. Blood 94:4132-42
- 170. Jozsef L, Zouki C, Petasis NA, Serhan CN, Filep JG. 2002. Lipoxin A4 and aspirin-triggered 15-epilipoxin A4 inhibit peroxynitrite formation, NFκ B and AP-1 activation, and IL-8 gene expression in human leukocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:13266-71
- 171. Godson C, Mitchell S, Harvey K, Petasis NA, Hogg N, Brady HR. 2000. Cutting edge: lipoxins rapidly stimulate nonphlogistic phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils by monocyte-derived macrophages. J. Immunol. 164:1663-67
- 172. Snelgrove RJ, Jackson PL, Hardison MT, Noerager BD, Kinloch A, et al. 2010. A critical role for LTA4H in limiting chronic pulmonary neutrophilic inflammation. Science 330:90-94
- 173. Tanaka D, Kagari T, Doi H, Shimozato T. 2006. Essential role of neutrophils in anti-type II collagen antibody and lipopolysaccharide-induced arthritis. Immunology 119:195-202
- 174. Chen M, Lam BK, Kanaoka Y, Nigrovic PA, Audoly LP, et al. 2006. Neutrophil-derived leukotriene B4 is required for inflammatory arthritis. J. Exp. Med. 203:837-42
- 175. Kim ND, Chou RC, Seung E, Tager AM, Luster AD. 2006. A unique requirement for the leukotriene B4 receptor BLT1 for neutrophil recruitment in inflammatory arthritis. J. Exp. Med. 203:829-35
- 176. Chou RC, Kim ND, Sadik CD, Seung E, Lan Y, et al. 2010. Lipid-cytokine-chemokine cascade drives neutrophil recruitment in a murine model of inflammatory arthritis. Immunity 33:266-78
- 177. Virchow R. 1862 /1863. Die krankhaften Geschwulste: 30 Vorlesungen gehalten wahrend des Wintersemesters 1862/1863 . Berlin: Hirschwald
- 178. Shacter E, Beecham EJ, Covey JM, Kohn KW, Potter M. 1988. Activated neutrophils induce prolonged DNAdamage in neighboring cells. Carcinogenesis 9:2297-304
- 179. Dizdaroglu M, Olinski R, Doroshow JH, Akman SA. 1993. Modification of DNA bases in chromatin of intact target human cells by activated human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Cancer Res. 53:1269-72
- 180. Gregory AD, McGarry Houghton A. 2011. Tumor-associated neutrophils: new targets for cancer therapy. Cancer Res. 71:2411-16
- 181. Bellocq A, Antoine M, Flahault A, Philippe C, Crestani B, et al. 1998. Neutrophil alveolitis in bronchioloalveolar carcinoma: induction by tumor-derived interleukin-8 and relation to clinical outcome. Am. J. Pathol. 152:83-92

- 182. Jensen HK, Donskov F, Marcussen N, Nordsmark M, Lundbeck F, von der Maase H. 2009. Presence of intratumoral neutrophils is an independent prognostic factor in localized renal cell carcinoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 27:4709-17
- 183. Ji H, Houghton AM, Mariani TJ, Perera S, Kim CB, et al. 2006. K-ras activation generates an inflammatory response in lung tumors. Oncogene 25:2105-12
- 184. Pekarek LA, Starr BA, Toledano AY, Schreiber H. 1995. Inhibition of tumor growth by elimination of granulocytes. J. Exp. Med. 181:435-40
- 185. Shojaei F, Singh M, Thompson JD, Ferrara N. 2008. Role of Bv8 in neutrophil-dependent angiogenesis in a transgenic model of cancer progression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105:2640-45
- 186. Huh SJ, Liang S, Sharma A, Dong C, Robertson GP. 2010. Transiently entrapped circulating tumor cells interact with neutrophils to facilitate lung metastasis development. Cancer Res. 70:6071-82
- 187. Fridlender ZG, Sun J, Kim S, Kapoor V, Cheng G, et al. 2009. Polarization of tumor-associated neutrophil phenotype by TGFβ : 'N1' versus 'N2' TAN. Cancer Cell 16:183-94
- 188. De Santo C, Arscott R, Booth S, Karydis I, Jones M, et al. 2010. Invariant NKT cells modulate the suppressive activity of IL-10-secreting neutrophils differentiated with serum amyloid A. Nat. Immunol. 11:1039-46
- 189. Gabrilovich DI, Nagaraj S. 2009. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells as regulators of the immune system. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9:162-74
- 190. Zea AH, Rodriguez PC, Atkins MB, Hernandez C, Signoretti S, et al. 2005. Arginase-producing myeloid suppressor cells in renal cell carcinoma patients: a mechanism of tumor evasion. Cancer Res. 65:3044-48
- 191. Rodriguez PC, Ernstoff MS, Hernandez C, Atkins M, Zabaleta J, et al. 2009. Arginase I-producing myeloid-derived suppressor cells in renal cell carcinoma are a subpopulation of activated granulocytes. Cancer Res. 69:1553-60
- 192. Kusmartsev S, Nefedova Y, Yoder D, Gabrilovich DI. 2004. Antigen-specific inhibition of CD8 + Tcell response by immature myeloid cells in cancer is mediated by reactive oxygen species. J. Immunol. 172:989-99
- 193. Raza K, Scheel-Toellner D, Lee CY, Pilling D, Curnow SJ, et al. 2006. Synovial fluid leukocyte apoptosis is inhibited in patients with very early rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res. Ther. 8:R120
- 194. Harper L, Cockwell P, Adu D, Savage CO. 2001. Neutrophil priming and apoptosis in anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody-associated vasculitis. Kidney Int. 59:1729-38
- 195. Ren Y, Tang J, Mok MY, Chan AW, Wu A, Lau CS. 2003. Increased apoptotic neutrophils and macrophages and impaired macrophage phagocytic clearance of apoptotic neutrophils in systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 48:2888-97
- 196. Brouwer E, Huitema MG, Mulder AH, Heeringa P, van Goor H, et al. 1994. Neutrophil activation in vitro and in vivo in Wegener's granulomatosis. Kidney Int. 45:1120-31
- 197. Hacbarth E, Kajdacsy-Balla A. 1986. Low density neutrophils in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and acute rheumatic fever. Arthritis Rheum. 29:1334-42
- 198. Bennett L, Palucka AK, Arce E, Cantrell V, Borvak J, et al. 2003. Interferon and granulopoiesis signatures in systemic lupus erythematosus blood. J. Exp. Med. 197:711-23
- 199. Yasutomo K, Horiuchi T, Kagami S, Tsukamoto H, Hashimura C, et al. 2001. Mutation of DNASE1 in people with systemic lupus erythematosus. Nat. Gen. 28:313-14
- 200. Chen G, Zhuchenko O, Kuspa A. 2007. Immune-like phagocyte activity in the social amoeba. Science 317:678-81
- 201. Ribeiro C, Brehelin M. 2006. Insect haemocytes: What type of cell is that? J. Insect Physiol. 52:417-29
- 202. Martin JS, Renshaw SA. 2009. Using in vivo zebrafish models to understand the biochemical basis of neutrophilic respiratory disease. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 37:830-37
- 203. Robert J, Ohta Y. 2009. Comparative and developmental study of the immune system in Xenopus . Dev. Dyn. 238:1249-70
- 204. Hawkey CM. 1985. Analysis of hematologic findings in healthy and sick adult chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ). J. Med. Primatol. 14:327-43

## Contents

| Decisions About Dendritic Cells: Past, Present, and Future Ralph M. Steinman ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                            | ♣ ♣ ♣ 1   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| The Basel Institute for Immunology Fritz Melchers ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                             | ♣ ♣ 23    |
| Regulation of Immune Responses by mTOR Jonathan D. Powell, Kristen N. Pollizzi, Emily B. Heikamp, and Maureen R. Horton ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ | ♣ ♣ 39    |
| Sphingosine-1-Phosphate and Lymphocyte Egress from Lymphoid Organs Jason G. Cyster and Susan R. Schwab ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                        | ♣ 69      |
| Selection of Self-Reactive T Cells in the Thymus Gretta L. Stritesky, Stephen C. Jameson, and Kristin A. Hogquist ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                               | ♣ ♣ 95    |
| Adaptive Immunity to Fungi Marcel Wuthrich, George S. Deepe, Jr., and Bruce Klein ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                                           | 115       |
| Microbial Translocation Across the GI Tract Jason M. Brenchley and Daniel C. Douek ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                      | 149       |
| The Response to and Repair of RAG-Mediated DNA Double-Strand Breaks Beth A. Helmink and Barry P. Sleckman ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                               | 175       |
| VLR-Based Adaptive Immunity Thomas Boehm, Nathanael McCurley, Yoichi Sutoh, Michael Schorpp, Masanori Kasahara, and Max D. Cooper ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                           | 203       |
| Immune Regulatory Function of B Cells Claudia Mauri and Anneleen Bosma ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                        | 221       |
| Lung Dendritic Cells in Respiratory Viral Infection and Asthma: From Protection to Immunopathology Bart N. Lambrecht and Hamida Hammad ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                      | 243       |
| Tolerance of Infections Janelle S. Ayres and David S. Schneider ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                       | 271       |
| microRNA Regulation of Inflammatory Responses Ryan M. O'Connell, Dinesh S. Rao, and David Baltimore ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                           | 295       |

<!-- image -->

Annual Review of Immunology

Volume 30, 2012

| Reflex Principles of Immunological Homeostasis Ulf Andersson and Kevin J. Tracey ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                                        | 313   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
| Chromatin Topology and the Regulation of Antigen Receptor Assembly Claudia Bossen, Robert Mansson, and Cornelis Murre ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                                             | 337   |
| Siglecs and Immune Regulation Shiv Pillai, Ilka Arun Netravali, Annaiah Cariappa, and Hamid Mattoo ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                                                                                                            | 357   |
| Monogenic Autoimmunity Mickie H. Cheng and Mark S. Anderson ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                                                                           | 393   |
| Germinal Centers Gabriel D. Victora and Michel C. Nussenzweig ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                                                                                       | 429   |
| Neutrophil Function: From Mechanisms to Disease Borko Amulic, Christel Cazalet, Garret L. Hayes, Kathleen D. Metzler, and Arturo Zychlinsky ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                       | 459   |
| Signaling by Myeloid C-Type Lectin Receptors in Immunity and Homeostasis David Sancho and Caetano Reis e Sousa                                                                                                                                                                                          | 491   |
| Regulatory T Cells: Mechanisms of Differentiation and Function Steven Z. Josefowicz, Li-Fan Lu, and Alexander Y. Rudensky ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                                                           | 531   |
| Pathogenesis of Human B Cell Lymphomas Arthur L. Shaffer III, Ryan M. Young, and Louis M. Staudt ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                                                                                  | 565   |
| Autophagy and the Immune System Petric Kuballa, Whitney M. Nolte, Adam B. Castoreno, and Ramnik J. Xavier ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                                                                                                                                                 | 611   |
| Innate Lymphoid Cells: Emerging Insights in Development, Lineage Relationships, and Function Hergen Spits and Tom Cupedo ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣                                                      | 647   |
| Cancer and Inflammation: An Old Intuition with Rapidly Evolving New Concepts                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 677   |
| Giorgio Trinchieri ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ Transcriptional and Epigenetic Control of T Helper Cell Specification: Molecular Mechanisms Underlying Commitment and Plasticity |       |
| Yuka Kanno, Golnaz Vahedi, Kiyoshi Hirahara, Kentner Singleton, and John J. O'Shea ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ 707 Induced CD4 + Foxp3 + Regulatory T Cells in Immune Tolerance       |       |
| Angelina M. Bilate and Juan J. Lafaille ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ ♣ The Microbiome in Infectious Disease and Inflammation                                                                                                       | 733   |