<!-- image -->

## The circadian neutrophil, inside-out

Samuel Ovadia, 1,†

Alaz Özcan, 1,†

and Andrés Hidalgo 1,2,

<!-- image -->

1 Department of Immunobiology and Program of Vascular Biology and Therapeutics, Yale University, 10 Amistad Street, New Haven, CT 06519, United States 2 Program of Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Calle Melchor Fernandez Almagro 3, Madrid 28029, Spain *Corresponding author: Department of Immunobiology and Program of Vascular Biology and Therapeutics, Yale University, 10 Amistad Street, New Haven, CT 06519, USA. Email: andres.hidalgo@yale.edu

## Abstract

The circadian clock has sway on a myriad of physiological targets, among which the immune and inflammatory systems are particularly prominent. In this review, we discuss how neutrophils, the wildcard of the immune system, are regulated by circadian oscillations. We describe cell-intrinsic and extrinsic diurnal mechanisms governing the general physiology and function of these cells, from purely immune to homeostatic. Repurposing the concepts discovered in other cell types, we then speculate on various uncharted avenues of neutrophil-circadian relationships, such as topology, metabolism, and the regulation of tissue clocks, with the hope of identifying exciting new avenues of work in the context of circadian immunity.

Keywords: myeloid, neutrophils, granulocytes, circadian, cell trafficking, immune response

## 1 Introduction

## 1.1 Circadian oscillations

The Earth provides a hospitable home for millions of species. The rotation around its axis and the sun generates a mixed landscape of ecosystems and rhythms. Attuned to Earth's periodicities, species  evolved  oscillations  relevant  to  their  specific  demands. Notably, circadian rhythms, the adaptations to daily changes in sunlight, temperature, or nutrient availability, 1 prevail in nearly all organisms and control a wide range of vital functions. In zones that lack diurnal light/dark oscillations, such as the arctics, organisms lack classical circadian rhythmicity, highlighting the importance of environmental cues for the evolution and maintenance of intrinsic circadian oscillations. 2

The  emergence  of  circadian  rhythmicity  coincides  with  the evolution of photosynthesis in cyanobacteria. 3,4 In these photosynthetic  prokaryotes,  diurnal  oscillations  primarily  serve  to achieve temporal gating of metabolic activity during the diurnal cycle.  In  higher  eukaryotes,  circadian  timekeeping  governs  a wide range of processes and features mechanistic complexity. 5 The mammalian clock machinery is governed by a transcriptional/posttranslational  feedback  loop  that  involves  2  prominent transcription  factors,  Clock  and  Bmal1, 6 which  form  a  heterodimer and prompt the expression of a diverse repertoire of genes (Fig. 1a). The binding of Clock/Bmal1 complex to enhancer boxes, induces the transcription of repressor proteins period (Per) and cryptochrome (Cry). The emergence of these repressors depletes the  supply  of  Clock/Bmal1  heterodimers  and,  eventually,  the pool of repressor proteins, thereby resetting the circadian clock. 5 Certain families of nuclear receptors-namely, ROR and REV-ERB-are involved in fine-tuning the clock activity by positive or negative regulation of Bmal1 activity, respectively. 7

The maestro of the mammalian circadian clock is the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) region of the hypothalamus, also referred

- † Contributed equally.

to as the central clock. 8 Instructed by the extrinsic photic cues, the SCN synchronizes the peripheral clocks that are present in parenchymal and circulating cells. The internal clock of the SCN is autonomous and perseveres even in isolation, 9,10 while the oscillations in peripheral tissues rapidly wear off in the absence of SCN input, as shown by SCN injury studies. 9,11 Nevertheless, the peripheral clocks also exhibit autonomy and align with cell- or tissue-specific functionality. 12,13 These peripheral clocks can be additionally  synchronized  by  light-independent  periodic  cues, such  as  feeding/fasting  cycles 14 or  immune  cell  infiltration. 15 Despite the inherent autonomy of circadian rhythmicity, periodic light/dark  exposure  is  a  fundamental  entrainment  factor  that maintains  organismal  health.  Indeed,  circadian  irregularity  in night-shift workers, social jet-laggers, and even visually impaired individuals substantially affects susceptibility to metabolic diseases, malignancies, and infections. 16 The impact of the circadian clock on organismal well-being is to a certain extent indirect, but the components of the core clock also directly regulate immunity, as we will discuss in the following sections.

## 1.2 The circadian immune system

A plethora of immune-related circuits display circadian rhythmicity. 17 For instance, the number of circulating immune cells in mice and humans oscillates during the 24-h cycle, and most subsets peak at the rest phase of the respective species (i.e. day for mice, night for humans). Earlier studies demonstrated that the magnitude of the immune response, which influences the susceptibility of individuals to infection, is dictated by the time of pathogen exposure. Mice challenged with either lipopolysaccharide or gram-positive  bacteria  at  night  exhibit  higher  mortality, 18-20 a phenomenon that was later attributed to the oscillations of serum cytokine levels, which strongly promote an inflammatory response. 21,22

Although critical, the example of serum cytokine fluctuations is  a  minute  example  of  immunological  processes  governed  by

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society for Leukocyte Biology.

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com

https://doi.org/10.1093/jleuko/qiad038

Advance access publication 31 March 2023

Review Article

A

Fig. 1. The core clock and neutrophil aging. (a) The core circadian clock in mammals relies on strict transcriptional/translational regulation. The heterodimer of Bmal1 and Clock, 2 activator transcription factors, induces the expression of many clock-controlled genes, which are involved in regulating key intracellular processes. In doing so, the BMAL1-CLOCK heterodimer also promotes transcription of its own repressors-namely, Period and Cry-as well as the nuclear proteins ROR and REV-ERB, which are collectively involved in resetting and fine-tuning the circadian clock. (b) Neutrophil release from the bone marrow is regulated by antagonistic chemokine signaling through the receptors CXCR4 and CXCR2. During maturation, neutrophils gradually upregulate CXCR2 on the cell surface and become more receptive to its ligands CXCL1 and CXCL2, which promote entry to circulation. Neutrophils recently egressed from the bone marrow, termed 'fresh' here, efficiently migrate to inflamed or infected tissues. At steady state, CXCR2 signals drive the circadian aging of circulating neutrophils through cell-intrinsic oscillations in Cxcl2 gene expression, governed by BMAL1. Aged neutrophils subsequently move from circulation into healthy, sterile tissues for elimination or to execute homeostatic functions.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

B

the circadian clock and core clock components, which include cell differentiation, recruitment, clearance, metabolism, and cell-to-cell communication. Numerous studies in mice point to

Bmal1  as  a  prominent  regulator  of  immunity,  for  instance, through controlling chemokine availability and cell-intrinsic and extrinsic migratory behaviors. The entry and exit of dendritic cells

|

and lymphocytes into the lymph node rely on Bmal1 oscillations in both immune cells and the partner stromal and vascular cells. Many  molecules  involved  in  immune  cell  recruitment  to  the lymph nodes, such as CCR7, CCL21, Lyve-1, S1PR1, and integrins, exhibit circadian rhythmicity, which in turn leads to oscillations in the associated adaptive immune response. 23,24 In various other tissues and contexts, Bmal1 intrinsically 25 or extrinsically 26 controls myeloid cell recruitment through chemokine-chemokine receptor interactions.

Recently, REV-ERBa, a member of the REV-ERB nuclear receptor family, has emerged as another clock component critical for the regulation of both innate and adaptive immunity. A number of studies  have  demonstrated  that  REV-ERBa  restricts  inflammasome activity and other inflammatory pathways in the context of  infection, 27 endotoxin  challenge, 7 neuroinflammation, 28 and colitis. 29 The culminating evidence is that REV-ERBa is responsible for inhibiting NLRP3 as well as NFκ B signaling, both of which are strong inflammatory intermediates. 28,29 Within the adaptive immune cell compartment, REV-ERBa and the ROR family of nuclear receptors are involved in T helper cell differentiation. 30-32 Seemingly potent anti-inflammatory effects of REV-ERBa led to a series of studies exploring the therapeutic potential of REV-ERBa agonists, 33-37 turning  the  spotlight  on  the  circadian  clock  as  a therapeutic target.

## 1.3 The circadian life of neutrophils

Neutrophils are short-lived myeloid cells with critical roles for host protection in all vertebrates. 38 Their short life span, combined with high abundance in the circulation, creates a massive production demand, which is primarily met by the bone marrow. 39 Each day, the bone marrow produces billions of neutrophils that are subsequently released into the bloodstream and cleared off in various tissues. 40-42 Using fate reporter mouse models (using an inducible Ly6G CreERT2 driver), we estimated the half-life of neutrophils in circulation to be around 10 h, within a similar range as seen in the spleen, lung, and liver, but shorter than in others such as the skin and  bone  marrow. 42 Pathologic  environments  influence  the  life span of mature neutrophils, at least in part by promoting survival or proliferation, as seen in cancer, 43,44 Staphylococcus aureus skin infections, 45 and hepatic injury. 46 In humans, the life span of neutrophils in the circulation is still debated, with a broad range of values reported. Based on deuterium labeling in vivo, more recent studies proposed a life span of circulating neutrophils of 5.4 d, 47 which was later recalculated to be 38 h. 48 The large discrepancy is likely the result of a different choice of experimental and mathematical methodology. The seemingly short and rhythmic lifetime predisposes neutrophils to circadian regulation, which likely evolved to finetune this periodic production-elimination pipeline, as well as diverse cellular functions.

Neutrophils mature in the bone marrow and enter the circulation as postmitotic cells, a process guided in mice by the activity of 2 antagonistic receptors, CXCR2 and CXCR4 49 (Fig. 1b). Signaling through CXCR4, via its ligand CXCL12, favors the retention of neutrophils in the bone marrow, while the ligands for CXCR2-namely, CXCL1 and CXCL2-stimulate neutrophil egress. 49 Release of neutrophils into the bloodstream is subject to circadian gatekeeping,  through  rhythmic  production  of  CXCL12  by  bone  marrow stromal cells. 50,51 The circadian drop in the CXCL12 levels, combined with an increase in CXCR2 expression on mature neutrophils, shifts the balance  between  the  opposing  chemokine signals toward cell egress. 49 Consistently, CXCR4-deficient neutrophils  exhibit  reduced  bone  marrow  retention  and  loss  of

|

rhythm in circulation in mice. 52 Neutrophil-vasculature interactions in the circulation along with subsequent trafficking into tissues are governed by the core clock and the sympathetic nervous system. 53

Mouse studies have provided valuable insights into the specifics of the circadian timekeeping of neutrophils. The active release of neutrophils from the bone marrow occurs between zeitgeber times (ZT) 17 and ZT5, a period when circulating neutrophils are predominantly 'fresh' (a term that refers to their recent immigration into blood). 52,54 Over time, circulating neutrophils in mice experience  phenotypical  and  functional  changes  indicative  of cellular aging (Fig. 1b). These 'aged' neutrophils are distinguished from their 'fresh' counterparts on the basis of low CD62L and high CXCR4 expression. A similar pattern in cell surface expression diurnal  dynamics  of  these  receptors  is  also  observed  in  humanderived  neutrophils. 52 Indeed,  nighttime-sampled  neutrophils (8 PM-8 AM) expressed higher levels of CD62L and lower CXCR4 compared with daytime cells. 52 We emphasize, however, that expression of these markers is not sufficient to categorize 'aging' as this can only be evaluated in the context of circadian dynamics.

The circadian patterns of neutrophils rely on external and internal cues. 55 The internal clock is particular in that it can be considered  more  a  'timer'  than  a  bona  fide  clock.  Indeed,  all  the circadian transformations observed in circulating neutrophils in mice occur in a matter of hours before the cell is eliminated, 52 and therefore individual neutrophils only see 1 diurnal cycle rather than oscillate over several cycles as other cells do. Another distinctive  aspect  of  the  circadian  neutrophil  is  that  circadian aging only appears to start once the cells move into the circulation, suggesting that the internal clock of neutrophils is kept off while neutrophils are in the bone marrow, in consistence with the high levels of CXCL12 and CXCR4 signaling (which blocks neutrophil aging) in this organ. 52 Finally, only a few hours after mobilization,  aged  neutrophils  infiltrate  tissues,  where  they  can  be reprogrammed to acquire nonimmune functions. 42 An interesting question moving forward will be to address whether the neutrophil clock stops 'ticking' or neutrophils simply shift to a different noncircadian program once in tissues.

In  mice,  CD62L lo CXCR4 hi aged  neutrophils  peak  in  blood around ZT5 and subsequently traffic into naive tissues for clearance. 40 Analysis of human-derived blood samples demonstrated that the number of circulating aged-like neutrophils follows similar diurnal cycles, with only a slight shift of the peak value to the early afternoon (4 PM). 52 This rhythmic nature of neutrophil entry in various organs begs the question of whether these cells are involved in the regulation of tissue-specific peripheral clocks. 40 In multiple  tissues,  rhythmic  neutrophil  seeding  has  been  shown to influence certain tissue-specific programs. 15,40 Neutrophils entering the intestine, for instance, are cleared in this tissue by macrophages,  which  in  turn  modulate  cytokine  production  and, indirectly, hematopoiesis in the bone marrow. 40 In the lungs, neutrophils have been shown to control approximately a quarter of the circadian gene expression, which was significantly disrupted upon systemic neutrophil depletion. A closer look into the circadian programs in the lungs affected by neutrophils revealed processes involved in cancer metastasis, which was confirmed using the  B16F1 metastasis model. 40 Similarly,  neutrophil  infiltration into  the  liver  was  linked  to  an  increase  in  gene  expression  of Bmal1 and Clock , as  well  as  hepatocyte  metabolic  activity. 15 Thus, circadian regulation of neutrophils extends beyond mere inflammatory processes  and  may  imprint  diurnal  dynamics  in the physiology of the tissues that they infiltrate, but the full extent of this temporal control remains to be investigated.

|

## 2 Circadian properties of neutrophils

## 2.1 Molecular regulation

The generation of transgenic animals with selective Bmal1 deletion in neutrophils ( Arntl DN ) revealed various physiological programs  governed  by  the  cell-intrinsic  neutrophil  clock. 40,52 For example,  diurnal  oscillations  in  the  neutrophil  transcriptome are susceptible to Bmal1 deletion 52,56 and govern a wide range of immune-related transcriptional programs, such as cytokine signaling, toll-like  receptor  signaling,  and cell migration.  Notably, this cell-intrinsic aging program is controlled by CXCR2 signaling through BMAL1-dependent autocrine CXCL2 production. Gene expression of Cxcl2 is significantly downregulated in Arntl DN mice, and both these mice and mice that lack the receptor for the chemokine ( CXCR2 DN ) lose the circadian pattern of neutrophil aging. In contrast,  CXCR4-deficient  neutrophils  exhibit  constitutive aging, a phenotype consistent with the opposing effects of this receptor on CXCR2 signaling. Importantly, the circadian-gated transcriptional  regulation  of  Cxcl2  facilitates  neutrophil  clearance from the circulation into tissues, where these cells can serve as a new set of eager troops against imminent pathogen exposure, and indeed excessive neutrophil aging in CXCR4 DN mice correlates with resistance to fungal infection. 52

While BMAL1 and CXCL2 evidently regulate circadian oscillation of gene expression in neutrophils, these cells rarely resort to de novo protein synthesis, which is cost-ineffective considering their short life span. Instead, neutrophils possess an extensive arsenal of proteins stored in their granules, readily mobilized upon pathogen encounter. 57 Thus, it is not surprising that cell-intrinsic circadian oscillations in neutrophils extend to the regulation of the proteome. Indeed, nighttime mouse neutrophils, which have been just released from the bone marrow, are enriched in proteins associated with granules, neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation, and cell migration. 56 In  contrast,  daytime  neutrophils, which have been circulating for hours and are thus considered aged, lose their granular cargo along the way. 56 For instance, the decline of granule proteins in the neutrophil proteome correlates with the elevation of elastase activity in plasma, corroborating the steady-state discharge of granules into circulation. 56 The loss of granule content, similar to the transcriptomic changes described previously,  is  under  the  control  of  the  Bmal1-driven  internal clock, and in vivo and ex vivo analyses showed that 'fresh' or night-like neutrophils produce more NETs as opposed to 'aged' or day-like cells. 56 Interestingly, similar observations were made in human neutrophils; granule density and granule protein content follow diurnal cycles, reaching a degranulation maximum during  the  afternoon. 56 Consistently,  fresh-like  neutrophils  in the  early  morning  exhibit  higher  NET-forming  capacities  compared with aged-like cells in the afternoon. 56 This fascinating concept  of  circadian  functional  oscillations  underlies  a  protective mechanism that we speculate serves to curb neutrophil-mediated tissue and vascular damage. More specifically, neutrophils that enter tissues during the daytime in mice possess less granule content and are therefore less toxic for the tissues, a notion that is in line  with  the  increased  severity  of  acute  lung  injury  at  night. Further studies are needed to explore the extent of circadian regulation imposed on the neutrophil proteome. Since neutrophils rely massively on their protein-based armament for the execution of both canonical (i.e. inflammatory) and noncanonical functions, the oscillations in the proteome are likely to have far greater implications in organismal physiology that are yet unclear.

Other  granulocytes  such  as  eosinophils,  basophils,  or  mast cells  could  potentially  employ  similar  disarming  mechanisms.

However, the evolutionary selection pressure on neutrophil disarming has been conceivably higher given their high abundance in the circulation. Since both basophils and mast cells are mostly tissue resident, degranulation in circulation is not likely to serve as a viable disarming mechanism for these cells. Nevertheless, they could still employ other ways of eliminating their potentially harmful cargo, which is often associated with pathology in type 2 immune diseases. 58

## 2.2 Cellular topology and migration

Not only is the molecular profile of mouse neutrophils subjected to aging, but the topology of the cell and internal organelles also undergoes circadian alterations, starting with the actin cytoskeleton and the global shape of the plasma membrane. 52 In general, the intracellular properties of immune cells have been a neglected area of research, and we provide here an overview of how circadian patterns impinge on the cellular structure and function of neutrophils.

During  circadian  aging,  circulating  neutrophils  lose  their microvilli concomitantly with the delocalization of the actin filaments from the cortex to the inner cytosolic part of the cell. 52 This topological transformation of the plasma membrane constrains the neutrophil to adapt their mode of extravasation. The high density of microvilli at the surface of fresh neutrophils enables a classic mode of migration, comprising the 4 main steps of adhesion, rolling, arrest, and diapedesis (Fig. 2b). Because microvilli are fundamental to present ligands for endothelial selectins away from the cell surface and onto the vascular wall, 59 the collapse  of  these  structures  renders  aged  neutrophils  less  sticky and able to roll under the shear forces present in the bloodstream and instead leads to sudden arrest upon contact with the endothelium and immediately initiate their transmigration to the perivascular tissue 52 (Fig. 2b). This switch in the preferential mechanism of neutrophils to cross the endothelium barrier is partly explained by the fact that the loss of microvilli changes the repertoire and topological distribution of adhesion molecules at the cell surface. Aged  neutrophils  exhibit  a  higher  density  of  integrins  such  as LFA-1, Mac-1, PECAM-1, CD44, VLA-4, and ICAM-1, in comparison to fresh neutrophils 60 (Fig. 2a). Moreover, the b2 integrin Mac-1 expressed  by  aged  neutrophils  exhibits  higher  binding  affinity  to ICAM-1 relative to the younger cells, suggesting that in addition to  being  upregulated  during  circadian  aging,  Mac-1  undergoes conformational  changes  that  accentuate  its  binding  affinity  to the endothelium barrier. 60 Interestingly, adhesion molecules at the surface of endothelial cells have been shown to oscillate in a circadian  fashion, 61 with  a  higher  expression  of  VCAM-1  and ICAM-1 during the dark phase. Overall, neutrophils and endothelial cells both undergo circadian alterations that culminate in enhanced infiltration of naive tissues by aged neutrophils, a property that  may  be  fundamental  in  the  organismal  distribution  and physiological function of these cells.

NETosis, the active release of chromatin and associated proteins, enables neutrophils to entrap microorganisms and to prevent  their  dissemination.  This  process  relies  in  part  on  the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton. 62 An early step of NETosis is the translocation of different proteins into the nucleus; for instance, elastase promotes chromatin decondensation and equips the DNA with proteases to kill the targeted pathogen. Translocation of elastase from the cytosol to the nucleus requires intact dynamics of the actin microfilaments network. 62 Studies that compared the NET-forming capacities of fresh and aged neutrophils  in  mice  revealed  that  both  types  of  neutrophils  are

|

Fig. 2. Cellular topology and neutrophils migration. (a) Once mobilized into blood, fresh neutrophils undergo BMAL1-dependent aging. Nuclear accumulation of BMAL1 promotes the expression of Cxcl2, which in an autocrine manner drives neutrophil aging. At the morphological level, aging promotes microvilli collapse, which leads to the redistribution of integrins and other adhesion receptors. Circadian aging of the cell is complemented by increased CXCR4 expression on the cell surface. (b) The morphological modifications of the plasma membrane as well as the redistribution of adhesion molecules drive a shift in the mode of extravasation. High microvilli density in fresh neutrophils makes them sticky to the endothelial wall and favors rolling on selectins. In contrast, aged neutrophils rely more on integrins now exposed at the cell surface to promote sudden arrest and diapedesis. (c) During circadian aging, neutrophils may undergo topological changes but also the nuclear envelope. In aged neutrophils, the nucleus is multilobulated, thereby facilitating locomotion through small pores in 3D environments where mechanical constraints are high, such as in tissues. Once embedded within tissues, aged neutrophils might migrate toward CXCL12 + niches to be reprogrammed. CXCL12 signaling additionally provokes changes in nuclear topology; the chromatin undergoes epigenetic modification that drives nuclear condensation, reduced nuclear volume, and increased cell deformability.

<!-- image -->

similarly prone to undergo NETosis but exhibit distinct responsive capacities according to the location and/or stimulus. For instance, aged neutrophils exhibit higher NET formation in the context of tumors 63 or sickle cell disease, 64 whereas fresh neutrophils are more  efficient  at  releasing  their  chromatin  in  the  context  of ischemia-reperfusion or acute lung injury. 56 Thus, the debate is still open on how aging influences NET formation and therefore how alterations in cortical actin polymerization affect the global NET-forming capacities of neutrophils.

The actin cytoskeleton also influences the morphology of the nucleus by interacting with the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex. 65 The LINC is made of nesprin and SUN protein  families  that  traverse  the  nuclear  envelope.  Although poor in LINC molecules, the neutrophil nucleus is subjected to mechanical  constraints  by  the  actin  microfilaments. 66 In  cells

expressing high levels of lamin A/C, such as dendritic cells, nucleation of the actin cytoskeleton around the nucleus is required for cellular migration through small pores. 67 The actin network exerts pressure forces on the nucleus that disrupt the lamin A/C mesh and reduce nuclear rigidity. However, the ARP2/3 complex, which mediates nucleation of actin filaments around the nucleus, is  dispensable  for  HL-60-derived  human  neutrophil  migration through  small  constrictions. 67 Altogether,  those  data  suggest that alterations in perinuclear actin fibers are unlikely to facilitate the extravasation of aged neutrophils into tissues. However, this concept is challenged by findings linking the actin-nuclear envelope interactions via myosin-1f (Myo1f) with neutrophil transmigration through small pores. 68 Likewise, Myo1f has been associated with the navigation of neutrophils within 3-dimensional (3D) microenvironments, where the mechanical constraints are

|

high.  In  both  contexts,  the  actin-Myo1f  and  nuclear  envelope complex helps to reduce the nuclear volume and increase its deformability. Thus, perinuclear accumulation of actin microfilaments may prepare aged neutrophils to migrate in 3D environments. In conclusion, the actin cytoskeleton is important for the locomotion of neutrophils despite their low lamin content and may therefore modulate the ability of neutrophils to differentially migrate in 3D microenvironments at different times of day.

## 2.3 Locomotion in 3D environments

Fresh or aged neutrophils, although exhibiting drastic differences in surface topology, are both capable of transmigrating into tissues and migrating in 3D microenvironments. However, they follow 2 distinct paradigms of extravasation and recruitment: fresh neutrophils are more prone to be recruited into inflamed tissues, whereas aged neutrophils are more efficient at infiltrating naive tissues. 52 This  implies  that  both  types  of  neutrophils  are  most likely to navigate in different environments, following a distinct gradient of chemokines and moving toward different structures within a tissue. Hence, they may be equipped accordingly. For instance, in the healthy lungs of mice, aged neutrophils accumulate in  the  periphery  of  large  blood  vessels,  following  a  gradient  of CXCL12. 40,42 In  contrast,  in  injured  skin,  recruited  neutrophils move toward areas of inflammation and must cross regions of disrupted extracellular matrix. Thus, the different migratory properties of fresh and aged neutrophils might enable partition, in time and space, of cells with different properties: one devoted to responding to perturbations in tissues and another one devoted to supporting organ homeostasis, thereby avoiding the potential perils of inflammatory fresh neutrophils in healthy tissues. 52,56

This model, while speculative, aligns with studies conducted in mice and shows that the nature of chemokine gradients followed by neutrophils and their mode of locomotion relies on topological adaptations. 69,70 For instance, in the injured skin, neutrophil migration toward the wounded site results from a 2-stage process that relies on the dynamics of actin microfilaments. 69 In a first 'search' phase, neutrophils sense their microenvironment to capture chemotactic signals. This necessitates the polarization of the actin cytoskeleton at the front edge of the cell that concentrates chemokine receptors at this front edge. In the second 'run,' phase neutrophils abruptly stop their random movement, reorientate their leading edge, and speed up toward the source of chemokines. This latter stage is dependent on the actin flow dynamics from the front to the back edge and the actin-myosin contractile structures accumulating  at  the  back  of  the  neutrophil. 69 Thus,  during wound-oriented migration, neutrophils (and possibly other leukocytes) initially sense the gradient of chemokines and then build a high-pace conveyor belt to rapidly reach the target site. Efficient actin nucleation  increases  the  area  of  exploration. 69 Thus, equipped with a dense cortical network of actin microfilament, fresh neutrophils appear to be more adapted to sense and quickly respond  to  inflammatory  chemotaxis  cues  than  their  aged counterpart.

Upon homeostasis, extravasating neutrophils experience and respond  to  a  gradient  of  CXCL12  molecules  via  the  G-protein coupled  receptors  CXCR4  and  atypical  chemokine  receptor 3. Subsequently, a signal is sent to the cell through the protein kinase A to promote the dimethylation of the H4K20 histone site, thereby accentuating the chromatin compaction and protecting the  chromatin  from  migration-induced  breaks.  This  change  in chromatin topology leads to a nuclear volume reduction and potentiates neutrophil motility in confined spaces 70 (Fig. 2c).

In conclusion, the nature of the chemokine gradient regulates the type of topological transformations required for a successful migration  and  might  explain  the  morphological  differences adopted by neutrophils at difference phases of the diurnal cycle.

## 2.4 The circadian nucleus

The nuclear topology of neutrophils undergoes circadian modifications  in  mice 54 and  humans 71 by  transforming  from  a  ring shape to a hypersegmented profile. While the molecular basis of this  circadian  alteration  is  not  understood,  several  studies  addressing the molecular structure of the murine and human nuclear  envelope  may  provide  some  insights.  The  multilobular shape of the nucleus is progressively acquired during granulopoiesis (i.e. the maturational process from a common granulocytemonocyte  progenitor  into  a  mature  neutrophil).  This  distinct morphology is caused by the lamin B receptor (LBR) and the lamin composition of the nuclear skeleton, which is rich in lamin B2 and low in lamin A/C. 66,72-74 During neutrophil maturation, LBR and lamin  B2  expression  follows  opposite  dynamics  in  comparison with lamins A/C and B1, in that they are progressively upregulated. LBR expression is under the regulation of CEBP/e, 75,76 a transcription factor known to be essential for neutrophil development, 77 and  accordingly,  patients  with  the  Pelger-Huët anomaly (PHA) who carry mutations in the gene encoding LBR feature an abnormal hypolobulated nuclear in neutrophils. 78 Interestingly, LBR affects the nuclear topology and chromatin organization of human neutrophils in a genotype-dependent manner,  as  homozygous  carriers  exhibit  a  lobeless  ovoid  nucleus, and suggesting that LBR plays a dose-dependent role on the degree of segmentation. Thus, while the molecular basis of the circadian alterations in nuclear morphology are not understood, they are likely to be influenced by changes in the nuclear envelope proteins and to affect fundamental aspects of neutrophil biology.

The modification of the nuclear shape during neutrophil aging likely affects fundamental aspects of the cell biology. Indeed, the nuclear morphology of neutrophils has been observed to influence different canonical tasks, including chemotaxis, 70,79 as well as the chromatin organization, 80 further influencing gene expression. 81 But  how  might  changes  in  the  nucleus  affect  the  capacity  of aged neutrophils to reach tissular niches?

Progressing in the tissue parenchyma requires morphological adaptability and, notably, a nucleus that can deform and bear mechanical stress without breaking. 82 Neutrophils are naturally equipped with a nucleus of lower stiffness in comparison with other leukocytes due to the aforementioned composition of their nucleoskeleton largely devoid of lamin A/C. 66 However, low lamin expression makes the cell prone to nuclear envelope rupture in scenarios of high tension, as seen in laminopathies. 83,84 Physical stress on the nucleus may be particularly high during migration in confined environments, and hence it is likely that to circumvent this biological hurdle, neutrophils feature high heterochromatin at the periphery of the nucleoplasm. 85 Similarly, it is tempting to speculate that increasing the tortuosity of the nuclear envelope, as seen in aged neutrophils, could reduce the volume occupied  by  the  nucleus  and  therefore  lower  the  exposure  of  the nucleus  to  the  mechanical  stress  imposed  by  confined  spaces, thereby protecting the nuclear envelope and chromatin integrity. Elegantly illustrating this model, studies have shown that in response to chemokine gradients, neutrophils adapt their chromatin  topology  to  reduce  the  nuclear  volume  and  increase  its deformability. 70 While these analyses did not address the circadian alterations in nuclear topology, it is intriguing that

neutrophils upregulate CXCR4 during aging 54 and migrate toward CXCL12-enriched areas in the lung. 42 Another potential value of a multilobular nucleus is hinted from recent findings demonstrating that the nucleus guides 3D migration of cells through paths of  least  resistance. 86 Although  this  study  was  conducted  on 'mononuclear' cells, it is possible that each segment of the neutrophil nucleus acts independently to cover more possible trajectories. In this light, it would be very informative to compare the migration of neutrophils from PHA patients-derived vs healthy patients in an artificial 3D environment that mimics the mechanical constraints of tissues. Overall, we propose that the circadian transformation  of  nucleus  topology  renders  aged  neutrophils more capable of migrating in 3D environments, consistent with their preferred location into naive tissues.

Contrasting with migration, the influence of nuclear topology on other effector functions of neutrophils, including release of reactive oxygen species, cytokines, or NETs, is less evident. 66 Several studies have addressed this question by analyzing the functional capacities  of  PHA-derived  neutrophils  or  LBR-deficient  mouse neutrophils. Interestingly, although essential for nuclear morphology,  LBR  is  not  required  for  efficient  killing  of S.  aureus in mice. 75 Likewise, neutrophils from patients with PHA do not present defects in phagocytosis or chemotaxis in comparison with those from healthy individuals. 87 Nevertheless, LBR protein expression and nuclear topology can influence effector functions depending on the species. Indeed, in an ex vivo model of mouse neutrophil differentiation, full deficiency in LBR protein synthesis compromises chemotaxis and oxidative burst but not phagocytosis. 79 In conclusion, circadian alterations in nuclear morphology are likely to influence fundamental aspects of immune and nonimmune roles of neutrophils, particularly in tissues or at sites of inflammation or infection.

## 3 Unconventional features of the circadian neutrophil

It  is  unclear  whether the  set of  circadian  transformations that neutrophils are subjected to includes modification of the chromatin architecture. However, the recent advances on nuclear biology discussed above make it conceivable that chromatin topology is affected  by  the  nuclear  deformation  associated  with  circadian aging  or  during  tissue  extravasation  and  migration.  Similarly, the fact that neutrophils upregulate the cell surface expression of CXCR4 during circadian aging, 54 that the CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling  axis  promotes  the  homing  of  neutrophils  into  their  tissue niche, 42 and that CXCL12 promotes chromatin remodeling in neutrophils 70 suggest that neutrophils in tissues undergo nuclear deformation and in epigenetic landscape remodeling as they follow CXCL12  gradients.  Last,  although  largely  transcriptionally  inactive at this stage, aged neutrophils have been shown to engage in new transcriptional programs when embedded within tissues, a finding also suggestive of chromatin remodeling. 42 Despite their poor  transcriptional  rates,  new  technologies 88 should  enable dual analysis of  chromatin and transcriptome profiles of fresh and aged neutrophils  in  relevant  pathophysiological  scenarios. In this line, it will be interesting to evaluate whether the chromatin organization of neutrophils from patients with PHA is altered secondary to the deficiency in LRB protein and whether they are capable of transcriptional reprogramming when embedded in tissue microenvironments.

Neutrophils can eject the nuclear chromatin into the outer environment to trap microorganisms and limit their dissemination. The released chromatin is decorated with granule-derived

|

proteins, including elastase, cathepsin G, proteinase-3, and myeloperoxidase, all of which are devoted to killing the entrapped microorganisms. 89,90 Depending  on  the  stimulus  initiating  the release of NETs, the location, and the inflammatory cost of such event, different regulatory mechanisms for NET formation can be distinguished. 91 The timing and type of NET formation are associated  with  circadian  oscillations  as  indeed  circadian  aging compromises the capacity of neutrophils to release chromatin, as shown in vitro upon PMA activation and in vivo in a model of ischemia-reperfusion. 56 This reduction in NET-forming capacities was explained by the gradual loss of granules and their content, 56 which are needed for chromatin decondensation and nuclear disintegration. 92 Conversely, in the context of sickle cell disease 64 or in  cancer, 63 aged-like  neutrophils  are  predisposed  to  undergo NETosis  and  thereby  promote  vaso-occlusive  events  or  tumor cell metastasis, respectively. The reasons underpinning this dichotomy in NETs release capacities remain to be elucidated, but it is possible that differences in defining neutrophil aging, in location (i.e. tissue, 56 circulation, 64 or microcirculation 63 ), or inducting stimulus (i.e. hypoxia 56 vs erythrocyte homeostasis 64 or tumorderived factors 63 ) may drive these differences, and it will be important to understand how changes in these factors during the diurnal cycle influence the content and properties of NETs.

Another intriguing aspect of neutrophils that may relate to circadian oscillations is their mitochondrial architecture and metabolism. The mitochondrial architecture oscillates from a tubular to a fragmented morphology by way of fusion and fission, thereby modulating the bioenergetic properties of mitochondria, ATP production, and calcium release, which in turn sustain the nutritional demands of the cells. 93 For instance, when nutrients abound, the mitochondrial network undergoes fragmentation to facilitate mitophagy. Interestingly, the fusion/fission cycle has been found to undergo circadian oscillations 94,95 and to rely on the molecular clock machinery in hepatocytes 96 as well as in cultured skin fibroblasts and brain lysates. 97 In addition to producing energy, mitochondria balance immune functions. 98 Specifically, the NET-forming capacity of neutrophils partly relies on the mitochondrial network and ATP production. Indeed, 'fusioned' mitochondria  potentiate  NETosis. 99 Neutrophil  motility  and  tissue extravasation also depend on the integrity of their mitochondrial pool, as illustrated by the finding that mitofusin 2 (Mfn2)-deficient neutrophils remain trapped inside the vasculature in zebrafish. 100 Likewise, Mfn2-deficient neutrophils cannot extravasate in mouse models of peritonitis. 100 It will be interesting to examine whether mitofusins or other components of the molecular machinery involved in mitochondrial dynamics of neutrophils undergo circadian  regulation  and  the  extent  to  which  they  regulate  their migratory and cytotoxic activity in vivo.

The circadian clock and metabolism of a cell are intimately intertwined and regulate one another. 101 While nutrient intake is known to entrain peripheral clocks, 102,103 the central clock governs catabolic and anabolic reactions that sustain life. 104 Deletion of core clock genes disrupts the balance of glucose, lipid, and amino acid metabolism and impairs the function of tissues with high metabolic activity, such as the liver. 105,106 In myeloid cells,  metabolic  activity  dictates  broad  functional  properties, such  as  inflammatory  activity  and  cell  differentiation. 107,108 Various  anchor  points  between  metabolism,  circadian  clock, and immunity have been studied in  macrophages or dendritic cells, 109-112 but whether these mechanisms also apply to neutrophils is not known. For instance, the mechanism of glucose degradation in macrophages influences the differentiation into the M1or M2-like phenotypes, thereby influencing their

|

inflammatory or reparative fate, respectively. 113 It  has  recently been shown that oscillations of antigen processing activity in dendritic cells rely on mitochondrial metabolism, which is regulated by Bmal1 expression. 114 It would be of utmost interest to elucidate the contribution of cell-intrinsic or extrinsic circadian rhythms to neutrophil metabolism and the downstream cellular function.

## 4 Concluding remarks

Here, we have reviewed and discussed the molecular and topological  transformations  that  circulating  neutrophils  experience throughout the circadian cycle, a time frame encompassing almost the entirety of a neutrophil's life. We highlight clock-driven adaptations,  including  the  remodeling  of  transcriptome,  proteome, cytoskeleton, and cell nucleus, all of which serve to fine-tune the timing of physiological and immunological programs. We describe the morphological changes in circulating neutrophils and the ensuing functions attributed to fresh and aged cells. 52,70,79

Despite extensive recent work, the field of circadian neutrophil biology is currently in its infancy, surrounded by more unknowns than knowns, and despite progress, many questions need to be placed in context. For instance, the clock is predominantly studied in circulating neutrophils while its activity within the bone marrow or other tissues is unclear. In line with this, a relevant challenge will be to understand whether reprogramming of the neutrophil clock can occur based on local extrinsic cues (i.e. depending on tissue context). Additionally, we emphasize the importance of defining tissue-specific circadian programs that are driven by the diurnal infiltration of neutrophils, as seen in hepatocyte metabolism. 15 We speculate that the cellular  and nuclear  topology  of  neutrophils, both of which are actively restructured to improve motility and function, 52,70 are susceptible to circadian regulation. Live imaging techniques  with  subcellular  resolution,  combined  with  clockdeficient  transgenic  mouse  models, 52 should  allow  tracking  of topological transformations of neutrophils. Delineating topologyclock relationships and other intracellular aspects of the neutrophil will add a precious piece to the neutrophil circadian puzzle.

Finally, because the internal timer separates in space and time (immune 'gating') the antimicrobial and proinflammatory functions of neutrophils, and because aged neutrophils can cause severe vascular inflammation, manipulation of this circadian neutrophil timer is of clear clinical relevance. For example, targeting the receptors that regulate this phenomenon, such as CXCR4, 52 may offer therapeutic alternatives for the broad range of diseases where neutrophils are main actors, including infections and cardiovascular  diseases. Nevertheless,  ideal therapeutic  candidates should exclusively target circadian aging of neutrophils and no other physiological processes, which will be a challenging task.

## Authorship

S.O., A.O., and A.H. contributed to the writing and editing of this manuscript. S.O. and A.O. designed the figures.

## Acknowledgments

We thank all members of our laboratory for discussion and contributions to the concepts included in this revision.

## Funding

This study has been possible through grants R01AI165661 from the  National  Institutes  of  Health,  RTI2018-095497-B-I00  from

Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovacion, HR17\_00527 from Fundación La Caixa, and  FET-OPEN  (no. 861878) from the European Commission.  A.O  is  supported  by  the  Swiss  National  Science Foundation (P500PB-206852). The CNIC is supported by Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovacion and the Pro CNIC Foundation and is a Severo Ochoa Center of Excellence (CEX2020-001041-S).

Conflict of interest statement. A.H. is a paid consultant for Calida Therapeutics. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.

## References

- 1. Patke  A,  Young  MW,  Axelrod  S.  Molecular  mechanisms  and physiological  importance  of  circadian  rhythms. Nat  Rev  Mol Cell  Biol .  2020:21(2):67-84.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-0190179-2
- 2. Lu W, Meng QJ, Tyler NJC, Stokkan K-A, Loudon Andrew SI. A circadian clock is not required in an arctic mammal. Curr Biol . 2010:20(6):533-537. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2010.01.042
- 3. Nakajima M, Imai K, Ito H, Nishiwaki T, Murayama Y, Iwasaki H, Oyama T, Kondo T. Reconstitution of circadian oscillation of cyanobacterial KaiC phosphorylation in vitro. Science . 2005:308(5720):414-415. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1108451
- 4. Tomita J, Nakajima M, Kondo T, Iwasaki H. No transcriptiontranslation feedback in circadian rhythm of KaiC phosphorylation. Science .  2005:307(5707):251-254.  https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.1102540
- 5. Takahashi JS. Transcriptional architecture of the mammalian circadian clock. Nat Rev Genet .  2017:18(3):164-179. https://doi. org/10.1038/nrg.2016.150
- 6. Vitaterna MH, King DP, Chang AM, Kornhauser JM, Lowrey PL, McDonald  JD,  Dove  WF,  Pinto  LH,  Turek  FW,  Takahashi  JS. Mutagenesis and mapping of a mouse gene, clock, essential for circadian behavior. Science . 1994:264(5159):719-725. https:// doi.org/10.1126/science.8171325
- 7. Gibbs JE, Blaikley J, Beesley S, Matthews L, Simpson KD, Boyce SH, Farrow SN, Else KJ, Singh D, Ray DW, et al. The nuclear receptor REV-ERB α mediates circadian regulation of innate immunity through selective regulation of inflammatory cytokines. Proc Natl Acad  Sci U  S A . 2012:109(2):582-587. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1106750109
- 8. Scheiermann C, Kunisaki Y, Frenette PS. Circadian control of the  immune  system. Nat  Rev  Immunol . 2013:13(3):190-198. https://doi.org/10.1038/nri3386
- 9. Inouye ST, Kawamura H. Persistence of circadian rhythmicity in a mammalian hypothalamic 'island' containing the suprachiasmatic  nucleus. Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A . 1979:76(11): 5962-5966. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.76.11.5962
- 10. Yamazaki S, Numano R, Abe M, Hida A, Takahashi R-i, Ueda M, Block GD, Sakaki Y, Menaker M, Tei H. Resetting central and peripheral  circadian  oscillators  in  transgenic  rats. Science . 2000:288(5466):682-685. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.288. 5466.682
- 11. Moore RY, Eichler VB. Loss of a circadian adrenal corticosterone rhythm following suprachiasmatic lesions in the rat. Brain Res . 1972:42(1):201-206. https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-8993(72) 90054-6
- 12. Welz PS, Zinna VM, Symeonidi A, Koronowski KB, Kinouchi K, Smith JG, Guillén IM, Castellanos A, Furrow S, Aragón F, et al. BMAL1-driven tissue clocks respond independently to light to maintain homeostasis. Cell . 2019:177(6):1436-1447.e12. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.009
- 13. Koronowski KB, Kinouchi K, Welz PS, Smith JG, Zinna VM, Shi J, Samad M, Chen S, Magnan CN, Kinchen JM, et al. Defining the

- independence  of  the  liver  circadian  clock. Cell . 2019:177(6): 1448-1462.e14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.025
- 14. Asher G, Sassone-Corsi P. Time for food: the intimate interplay between nutrition, metabolism, and the circadian clock. Cell . 2015:161(1):84-92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.015
- 15. Crespo  M,  Gonzaiez-Teran  B,  Nikolic  I,  Mora  A,  Folgueira  C, Rodríguez  E,  Leiva-Vega  L,  Pintor-Chocano  A,  FernándezChacón M, Ruiz-Garrido I, et al. Neutrophil infiltration regulates clock-gene  expression  to  organize  daily  hepatic  metabolism. Elife . 2020:9:1-25. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.59258
- 16. Roenneberg  T,  Merrow  M.  The  circadian  clock  and  human health. Curr Biol . 2016:26(10):R432-R443. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.cub.2016.04.011
- 17. Palomino-Segura  M,  Hidalgo  A.  Circadian  immune  circuits. J  Exp  Med 2021:218(2):e20200798.  https://doi.org/10.1084/JEM. 20200798.
- 18. Halberg  F,  Johnson  EA,  Brown  BW,  Bittner  JJ.  Susceptibility rhythm to E. coli endotoxin and bioassay. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med . 1960:103(1):142-144. https://doi.org/10.3181/00379727-103-25439
- 19. Feigin RD, San Joaquin VH, Haymond MW, Wyatt RG. Daily periodicity  of  susceptibility  of  mice  to  pneumococcal  infection. Nature . 1969:224(5217):379-380. https://doi.org/10.1038/224379a0
- 20. Shackelford  PG,  Feigin  RD.  Periodicity  of  susceptibility  to pneumococcal infection: influence of light and adrenocortical secretions. Science .  1973:182(4109):285-287.  https://doi.org/10. 1126/science.182.4109.285
- 21. Keller M, Mazuch J, Abraham U, Eom GD, Herzog ED, Volk H-D, Kramer A, Maier B. A circadian clock in macrophages controls inflammatory immune responses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2009:106(50):21407-21412. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0906361106
- 22. Mul Fedele ML, Aiello I, Caldart CS, Golombek DA, Marpegan L, Paladino  N.  Differential  thermoregulatory  and  inflammatory patterns in the circadian response to LPS-induced septic shock. Front  Cell  Infect  Microbiol .  2020:10:100.  https://doi.org/10.3389/ FCIMB.2020.00100
- 23. Druzd  D,  Matveeva  O,  Ince  L,  Harrison  U,  He  W,  Schmal  C, Herzel H, Tsang AH, Kawakami N, Leliavski A, et al. Lymphocyte  circadian  clocks  control  lymph  node  trafficking and adaptive immune responses. Immunity . 2017:46(1): 120-132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2016.12.011
- 24. Holtkamp SJ, Ince LM, Barnoud C, Schmitt MT, Sinturel F, Pilorz V,  Pick  R,  Jemelin  S,  Mühlstädt  M,  Boehncke  W-H, et al. Circadian  clocks  guide  dendritic  cells  into  skin  lymphatics. Nat  Immunol . 2021:22(11):1375-1381.  https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41590-021-01040-x
- 25. Nguyen  KD,  Fentress  SJ,  Qiu  Y,  Yun  Karen,  Cox  Jeffery  S., Chawla Ajay. Circadian gene Bmal1 regulates diurnal oscillations  of  Ly6C(hi)  inflammatory  monocytes. Science .  2013:341(6153):1483-1488. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1240636
- 26. Gibbs J, Ince L, Matthews L, Mei J, Bell T, Yang N, Saer B, Begley N, Poolman T, Pariollaud M, et al. An epithelial circadian clock controls  pulmonary  inflammation  and  glucocorticoid  action. Nat Med . 2014:20(8):919-926. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3599
- 27. Pourcet B, Zecchin M, Ferri L, Beauchamp J, Sitaula S, Billon C, Delhaye  S,  Vanhoutte  J,  Mayeuf-Louchart  A,  Thorel  Q, et  al. Nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group D member 1 regulates circadian activity of NLRP3 inflammasome to reduce the severity of  fulminant  hepatitis  in  mice. Gastroenterology .  2018:154(5): 1449-1464.e20. https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2017.12.019
- 28. Kou L,  Chi  X,  Sun  Y,  Han  C,  Wan  F,  Hu  J,  Yin  S,  Wu  J,  Li  Y, Zhou  Q, et  al. The  circadian  clock  protein  Rev-erb α provides neuroprotection  and  attenuates  neuroinflammation  against Parkinson's  disease  via  the  microglial  NLRP3  inflammasome.

|

- J Neuroinflammation . 2022:19(1):133. https://doi.org/10.1186/ S12974-022-02494-Y
- 29. Wang S, Lin Y, Yuan X, Li F, Guo L, Wu B. REV-ERB α integrates colon  clock  with  experimental  colitis  through  regulation  of NF- B/NLRP3 axis. κ Nat Commun . 2018:9(1):1-12.
- 30. Yu X, Rollins D, Ruhn KA, Stubblefield JJ, Green CB, Kashiwada M, Rothman PB, Takahashi JS, Hooper LV. TH17 cell differentiation  is  regulated  by  the  circadian  clock. Science .  2013:342(6159):727-30. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1243884
- 31. Chang C, Loo CS, Zhao X, Solt LA, Liang Y, Bapat SP, Cho H, Kamenecka TM, Leblanc M, Atkins AR. The nuclear receptor REV-ERB Α modulates Th17 cell-mediated autoimmune disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2019:116(37):18528-18536. https://doi. org/10.1073/pnas.1907563116
- 32. Amir M, Chaudhari S, Wang R, Campbell S, Mosure SA, Chopp LB, Lu Q, Shang J, Pelletier OB, He Y. REV-ERB α regulates TH17 cell  development  and  autoimmunity. Cell  Rep . 2018:25(13): 3733-3749.e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.11.101
- 33. Solt LA, Wang Y, Banerjee S, Hughes T, Kojetin DJ, Lundasen T, Shin Y, Liu J, Cameron MD, Noel R, et al. Regulation of circadian behaviour  and  metabolism  by  synthetic  REV-ERB  agonists. Nature . 2012:485(7396):62-68. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11030
- 34. Wang S, Kozai M, Mita H, Cai Z, Masum MA, Ichii O, Takada K, Inaba M. REV-ERB agonist suppresses IL-17 production in γδ T cells  and  improves  psoriatic  dermatitis  in  a  mouse  model. Biomed  Pharmacother .  2021:144:112283.  https://doi.org/10.1016/ J.BIOPHA.2021.112283
- 35. Reitz CJ, Alibhai FJ, Khatua TN, Rasouli M, Bridle BW, Burris TP, Martino TA. SR9009 administered for one day after myocardial ischemia-reperfusion prevents heart failure in mice by targeting  the  cardiac  inflammasome. Commun  Biol . 2019:2(1):353. https://doi.org/10.1038/S42003-019-0595-Z
- 36. Roby DA, Ruiz F, Kermath BA, Voorhees JR, Niehoff M, Zhang J, Morley JE, Musiek ES, Farr SA, Burris TP. Pharmacological activation of the nuclear receptor REV-ERB reverses cognitive deficits  and  reduces  amyloidβ burden  in  a  mouse  model  of Alzheimer's disease. PLoS One. 2019:14(4):e0215004. https://doi. org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0215004
- 37. Zhang L, Zhang R, Tien CL, Chan RE, Sugi K, Fu C, Griffin AC, Shen Y, Burris TP, Liao X, et al. REV-ERB α ameliorates heart failure  through  transcription  repression. JCI  insight . 2017:2(17): e95177. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI.INSIGHT.95177
- 38. Burn GL, Foti A, Marsman G, Patel DF, Zychlinsky A. The neutrophil. Immunity .  2021:54(7):1377-1391.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. immuni.2021.06.006
- 39. Hidalgo A, Casanova-Acebes M. Dimensions of neutrophil life and  fate. Semin  Immunol . 2021:57:101506.  https://doi.org/10. 1016/J.SMIM.2021.101506
- 40. Casanova-Acebes M, Nicolás-Ávila JA, Yao Li JL, García-Silva S, Balachander A, Rubio-Ponce A, Weiss LA, Adrover JM, Burrows K, A-González N, et  al. Neutrophils instruct homeostatic and pathological  states  in  naive  tissues. J  Exp  Med .  2018:215(11): 2778-2795. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20181468
- 41. Ng LG, Ostuni R, Hidalgo A. Heterogeneity of neutrophils. Nat Rev Immunol . 2019:19(4):255-265. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41577-019-0141-8
- 42. Ballesteros  I,  Rubio-Ponce  A,  Genua  M,  Lusito  E,  Kwok  I, Fernández-Calvo G, Khoyratty TE, van Grinsven E, González-Hernández S, Nicolás-Ávila JÁ, et al. Co-option of neutrophil  fates  by  tissue  environments. Cell .  2020:183(5):1282-1297.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.003
- 43. De Santo C, Arscott R, Booth S, Karydis I, Jones M, Asher R, Salio M, Middleton M, Cerundolo V. Invariant NKT cells modulate the

|

suppressive  activity  of  IL-10-secreting  neutrophils  differentiated with serum amyloid A. Nat Immunol . 2010:11(11): 1039-1046. https://doi.org/10.1038/ni.1942

- 44. Pfirschke  C,  Engblom  C,  Gungabeesoon  J,  Lin  Y,  Rickelt  S, Zilionis  R,  Messemaker  M,  Siwicki  M,  Gerhard  GM,  Kohl  A, et  al. Tumor-promoting  Ly-6G+  SiglecFhigh  cells  are  mature and long-lived neutrophils. Cell Rep . 2020:32(12):108164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108164
- 45. Kim MH, Granick JL, Kwok C, Walker NJ, Borjesson DL, Curry FR, Miller LS, Simon SI. Neutrophil survival and c-kit(+)-progenitor proliferation  in  Staphylococcus  aureus-infected  skin  wounds promote resolution. Blood .  2011:117(12):3343-3352. https://doi. org/10.1182/blood-2010-07-296970
- 46. Wang J, Hossain M, Thanabalasuriar A, Gunzer M, Meininger C, Kubes P. Visualizing the function and fate of neutrophils in sterile  injury  and  repair. Science .  2017:358(6359):111-116.  https:// doi.org/10.1126/science.aam9690
- 47. Pillay J, Den Braber I, Vrisekoop N, Kwast LM, de Boer RJ, Borghans JAM, Tesselaar K, Koenderman L. In vivo labeling with 2H2O reveals  a  human  neutrophil  lifespan  of  5.4  d. Blood .  2010:116(4): 625-627. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-01-259028
- 48. Lahoz-Beneytez  J,  Elemans  M,  Zhang  Y,  Ahmed  R,  Salam  A, Block M, Niederalt C, Asquith B, Macallan D. Human neutrophil kinetics: modeling of stable isotope labeling data supports short blood neutrophil half-lives. Blood . 2016:127(26):3431-3438. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2016-03-700336
- 49. Eash  KJ,  Greenbaum  AM,  Gopalan  PK,  Link  DC.  CXCR2  and CXCR4  antagonistically  regulate  neutrophil  trafficking  from murine  bone  marrow. J Clin Invest . 2010:120(7):2423-2431. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI41649
- 50. Méndez-Ferrer S, Lucas D, Battista M, Frenette PS. Haematopoietic stem cell release is regulated by circadian oscillations. Nature . 2008:452(7186):442-447.  https://doi.org/10. 1038/nature06685
- 51. De Filippo K, Rankin SM. CXCR4, the master regulator of neutrophil  trafficking  in  homeostasis  and  disease. Eur  J  Clin  Invest . 2018:49(Suppl. 2):e12949. https://doi.org/10.1111/eci.12949
- 52. Adrover JM, del Fresno C, Crainiciuc G, Cuartero MI, Casanova-Acebes M, Weiss LA, Huerga-Encabo H, Silvestre-Roig C, Rossaint J, Cossío I. A neutrophil timer coordinates immune defense and vascular protection. Immunity . 2019:50(2):390-402.e10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2019.01.002
- 53. Scheiermann C, Kunisaki Y, Lucas D, Chow A, Jang J-E, Zhang D, Hashimoto D, Merad M, Frenette PS. Adrenergic nerves govern  circadian  leukocyte  recruitment  to  tissues. Immunity . 2012:37(2):290-301.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2012.05. 021
- 54. Casanova-Acebes M, Pitaval C, Weiss LA, Nombela-Arrieta C, Chèvre R, A-González N, Kunisaki Y, Zhang D, van Rooijen N, Silberstein LE, et al. Rhythmic modulation of the hematopoietic niche  through  neutrophil  clearance. Cell . 2013:153(5):1025. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.04.040
- 55. Aroca-Crevillén A, Adrover JM, Hidalgo A. Circadian features of neutrophil biology. Front Immunol . 2020:11:576. https://doi.org/ 10.3389/FIMMU.2020.00576
- 56. Adrover JM, Aroca-Crevillén A, Crainiciuc G, Ostos F, Rojas-Vega Y, Rubio-Ponce A, Cilloniz C, Bonzón-Kulichenko E, Calvo E, Rico D, et al. Programmed 'disarming' of the neutrophil proteome reduces the magnitude of inflammation. Nat Immunol . 2020:21(2): 135-144. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-019-0571-2
- 57. Borregaard N. Neutrophils, from marrow to microbes. Immunity . 2010:33(5):657-670. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2010.11.

- 58. Özcan  A,  Boyman  O.  Mechanisms  regulating  neutrophil  responses  in  immunity,  allergy,  and  autoimmunity. Allergy . 2022:77(12):3567-3583. https://doi.org/10.1111/ALL.15505
- 59. von Andrian UH, Hasslen SR, Nelson RD, Erlandsen SL, Butcher EC.  A  central  role  for  microvillous  receptor  presentation  in leukocyte adhesion under flow. Cell . 1995:82(6):989-999. https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(95)90278-3
- 60. Uhl B, Vadlau Y, Zuchtriegel G, Nekolla K, Sharaf K, Gaertner F, Massberg S, Krombach F, Reichel CA. Aged neutrophils contribute to the first line of defense in the acute inflammatory response. Blood .  2016:128(19):2327-2337. https://doi.org/10.1182/ blood-2016-05-718999
- 61. He W, Holtkamp S, Hergenhan SM, Kraus K, de Juan A, Weber J, Bradfield P, Grenier JMP, Pelletier J, Druzd D, et al. Circadian expression of migratory factors establishes lineage-specific signatures  that  guide  the  homing  of  leukocyte  subsets  to  tissues. Immunity . 2018:49(6):1175-1190.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. immuni.2018.10.007
- 62. Sprenkeler EGG, Tool ATJ, Henriet SSV, van Bruggen R, Kuijpers TW. Formation of neutrophil extracellular traps requires actin cytoskeleton  rearrangements. Blood . 2022:139(21):3166-3180. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2021013565
- 63. Peng Z, Liu C, Victor AR, Cao DY, Veiras LC, Bernstein EA, Khan Z, Giani JF, Cui X, Bernstein KE, et al. Tumors  exploit CXCR4hiCD62Llo  aged  neutrophils  to  facilitate  metastatic spread. Oncoimmunology . 2021:10(1):1870811. https://doi.org/10. 1080/2162402X.2020.1870811
- 64. Zhang D, Chen G, Manwani D, Mortha A, Xu C, Faith JJ, Burk RD, Kunisaki Y, Jang JE, Scheiermann C, et al. Neutrophil ageing is regulated by the microbiome. Nature .  2015:525(7570):528-532. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15367
- 65. Chang W, Worman HJ, Gundersen GG. Accessorizing and anchoring  the  LINC  complex  for  multifunctionality. J  Cell  Biol . 2015:208(1):11-22. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201409047
- 66. Manley HR, Keightley MC, Lieschke GJ. The neutrophil nucleus: an important influence on neutrophil migration and function. Front Immunol . 2018:9:2867. https://doi.org/10.3389/FIMMU. 2018.02867
- 67. Thiam HR, Vargas P, Carpi N, Crespo CL, Raab M, Terriac E, King MC,  Jacobelli  J,  Alberts  AS,  Stradal  T, et  al. Perinuclear  Arp2/ 3-driven actin polymerization enables nuclear deformation to facilitate cell migration  through  complex  environments. Nat Commun . 2016:7(1):10997. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10997
- 68. Salvermoser  M,  Pick  R,  Weckbach  LT,  Zehrer  A,  Löhr  P, Drechsler M, Sperandio M, Soehnlein O, Walzog B. Myosin 1f is specifically required for neutrophil migration in 3D environments during acute inflammation. Blood . 2018:131(17): 1887-1898. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2017-10-811851
- 69. Georgantzoglou A, Poplimont H, Walker HA, Lämmermann T, Sarris  M.  A  two-step  search  and  run  response  to  gradients shapes  leukocyte  navigation  in  vivo. J  Cell  Biol .  2022:221(8): e202103207. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.202103207
- 70. Calì B, Deygas M, Munari F, Marcuzzi E, Cassará A, Toffali L, Vetralla  M,  Bernard  M,  Piel  M,  Gagliano  O, et  al. Atypical CXCL12 signaling enhances neutrophil migration by modulating  nuclear  deformability. Sci  Signal . 2022:15(761):eabk2552. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.abk2552
- 71. Ella K, Csépányi-Kömi R, Káldi K. Circadian regulation of human peripheral  neutrophils. Brain  Behav  Immun . 2016:57:209-221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2016.04.016
- 72. Carvalho LO, Aquino EN, Neves ACD, Fontes W. The neutrophil nucleus  and  its  role  in  neutrophilic  function. J  Cell  Biochem . 2015:116(9):1831-1836. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.25124

- 73. Hoffmann K, Sperling K, Olins AL, Olins DE. The granulocyte nucleus  and  lamin B  receptor:  avoiding  the  ovoid. Chromosoma . 2007:116(3):227-235. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00412-007-0094-8
- 74. Olins AL, Olins DE. Cytoskeletal influences on nuclear shape in granulocytic HL-60 cells. BMC Cell Biol . 2004:5(1):30. https://doi. org/10.1186/1471-2121-5-30
- 75. Cohen TV,  Klarmann KD, Sakchaisri  K,  Cooper  JP,  Kuhns  D, Anver M, Johnson PF, Williams SC, Keller JR, Stewart CL. The lamin B receptor under transcriptional control of C/EBP ϵ is required for morphological but not functional maturation of neutrophils. Hum Mol Genet . 2008:17(19):2921-2933. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/hmg/ddn191
- 76. Malu K, Garhwal R, Pelletier MGH, Gotur D, Halene S, Zwerger M,  Yang  ZF,  Rosmarin  AG,  Gaines  P.  Cooperative  activity  of GABP with PU.1 or C/EBP ϵ regulates lamin B receptor gene expression, implicating their roles in granulocyte nuclear maturation. J  Immunol .  2016:197(3):910-922.  https://doi.org/10.4049/ jimmunol.1402285
- 77. Yamanaka R, Barlow C, Lekstrom-Himes J, Castilla LH, Liu PP, Eckhaus  M,  Decker  T,  Wynshaw-Boris  A,  Xanthopoulos  KG. Impaired  granulopoiesis,  myelodysplasia,  and  early  lethality in  CCAAT/enhancer  binding  protein  epsilon-deficient  mice. Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A .  1997:94(24):13187-13192. https://doi. org/10.1073/pnas.94.24.13187
- 78. Hoffmann K, Dreger CK, Olins AL, Olins DE, Shultz LD, Lucke B, Karl H, Kaps R, Müller D, Vayá A, et al. Mutations in the gene encoding the lamin B receptor produce an altered nuclear morphology in granulocytes (Pelger-Huët anomaly). Nat Genet . 2002:31(4):410-414. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng925
- 79. Gaines P, Tien CW, Olins AL, Olins DE, Shultz LD, Carney L, Berliner N . Mouse neutrophils lacking lamin B-receptor expression exhibit aberrant development and lack critical functional responses. Exp Hematol .  2008:36(8):965-976. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.exphem.2008.04.006
- 80. Zhu Y, Gong K, Denholtz M, Chandra V, Kamps MP, Alber F, Murre C. Comprehensive characterization of neutrophil genome  topology. Genes  Dev .  2017:31:141-153.  https://doi.org/10. 1101/gad.293910.116
- 81. Wong JJL, Ritchie W, Ebner OA, Selbach M, Wong JW, Huang Y, Gao D, Pinello N, Gonzalez M, Baidya K, et al. Orchestrated intron  retention  regulates  normal  granulocyte  differentiation. Cell .  2013:154(3):583-595. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.06. 052
- 82. Davidson PM, Denais C, Bakshi MC, Lammerding J. Nuclear deformability constitutes a rate-limiting step during cell migration  in  3-D  environments. Cell  Mol  Bioeng .  2014:7(3):293-306. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12195-014-0342-y
- 83. Kalukula Y, Stephens AD, Lammerding J, Gabriele S. Mechanics and functional consequences of nuclear deformations. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . 2022:23(9):583-602. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580022-00480-z
- 84. De vos WH, Houben F, Kamps M, Malhas A, Verheyen F, Cox J, Manders EM, Verstraeten  VL,  van  Steensel  MA,  Marcelis  CL, et al. Repetitive disruptions of the nuclear envelope invoke temporary loss of cellular compartmentalization in laminopathies. Hum Mol Genet .  2011:20(21):4175-4186. https://doi.org/10.1093/ hmg/ddr344
- 85. Olins  AL,  Zwerger  M,  Herrmann  H,  Zentgraf  H,  Simon  AJ, Monestier M, Olins DE. The human granulocyte nucleus: unusual nuclear envelope and heterochromatin composition. Eur J Cell Biol . 2008:87(5):279-290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejcb. 2008.02.007

|

- 86. Renkawitz J, Kopf A, Stopp J, de Vries I, Driscoll MK, Merrin J, Hauschild R, Welf ES, Danuser G, Fiolka R, et al. Nuclear positioning facilitates amoeboid migration along the path of least resistance. Nature .  2019:568(7753):546-550.  https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41586-019-1087-5
- 87. Johnson  CA,  Bass  DA,  Trillo  AA,  Snyder  MS,  DeChatelet  LR. Functional and metabolic studies of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the congenital Pelger-Huet anomaly. Blood . 1980:55(3): 466-469. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V55.3.466.466
- 88. Su JH, Zheng P, Kinrot SS, Bintu B, Zhuang X. Genome-scale imaging  of  the  3D  organization  and  transcriptional  activity  of chromatin. Cell .  2020:182(6):1641-1659.e26.  https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.cell.2020.07.032
- 89. Brinkmann V, Reichard U, Goosmann C, Fauler B, Uhlemann Y, Weiss DS, Weinrauch Y, Zychlinsky A. Neutrophil extracellular traps  kill  bacteria. Science .  2004:303(5663):1532-1535.  https:// doi.org/10.1126/science.1092385
- 90. Yipp BG, Petri B, Salina D, Jenne CN, Scott BN, Zbytnuik LD, Pittman  K,  Asaduzzaman  M,  Wu  K,  Meijndert  HC, et al. Infection-induced NETosis is a dynamic process involving neutrophil  multitasking  in  vivo. Nat  Med . 2012:18(9):1386-1393. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2847
- 91. Hidalgo A, Libby P, Soehnlein O, Aramburu IV, Papayannopoulos V, Silvestre-Roig C. Neutrophil extracellular traps: from physiology to pathology. Cardiovasc Res .  2022:118(13):2737-2753. https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvab329
- 92. Papayannopoulos  V,  Metzler  KD,  Hakkim  A,  Zychlinsky  A. Neutrophil elastase and myeloperoxidase regulate the formation  of  neutrophil  extracellular  traps. J  Cell  Biol .  2010:191(3): 677-691. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201006052
- 93. Wai T, Langer T. Mitochondrial dynamics and metabolic regulation. Trends Endocrinol Metab . 2016:27(2):105-117. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.tem.2015.12.001
- 94. Manella G, Asher G. The circadian nature of mitochondrial biology. Front  Endocrinol  (Lausanne) .  2016:7:162.  https://doi.org/10. 3389/fendo.2016.00162
- 95. Puig LS, Valera-Alberni M, Cantó C, Pillon NJ. Circadian rhythms and mitochondria: connecting the dots. Front Genet . 2018:9:452. https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2018.00452
- 96. Jacobi D, Liu S, Burkewitz K, Kory N, Knudsen NH, Alexander RK, Unluturk U, Li X, Kong X, Hyde AL, et al. Hepatic Bmal1 regulates rhythmic mitochondrial dynamics and promotes metabolic fitness. Cell  Metab .  2015:22(4):709-720.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cmet.2015.08.006
- 97. Schmitt K, Grimm A, Dallmann R, Oettinghaus B, Restelli LM, Witzig  M,  Ishihara  N,  Mihara  K,  Ripperger  JA,  Albrecht  U. Circadian control of DRP1 activity regulates mitochondrial dynamics  and  bioenergetics. Cell  Metab . 2018:27(3):657-666.e5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2018.01.011
- 98. Cervantes-Silva  MP,  Cox  SL,  Curtis  AM.  Alterations  in  mitochondrial morphology as a key driver of immunity and host defence. EMBO  Rep .  2021:22(9):e53086.  https://doi.org/10.15252/ embr.202153086
- 99. Amini P, Stojkov D, Felser A, Jackson CB, Courage C, Schaller A, Gelman L, Soriano ME, Nuoffer JM, Scorrano L, et al. Neutrophil extracellular trap formation requires OPA1-dependent glycolytic ATP production. Nat Commun .  2018:9(1):2958. https://doi. org/10.1038/S41467-018-05387-Y
- 100. Zhou W, Hsu AY, Wang Y, Syahirah R, Wang T, Jeffries J, Wang X, Mohammad H, Seleem MN, Umulis D, et al. Mitofusin 2 regulates neutrophil adhesive migration and the actin cytoskeleton. J Cell Sci . 2020:133(17):jcs248880.  https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs. 248880

|

- 101. Green CB, Takahashi JS, Bass J. The meter of metabolism. Cell . 2008:134(5):728-742. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.08.022
- 102. Damiola F, Le Minli N, Preitner N, Kornmann B, Fleury-Olela F, Schibler U. Restricted feeding uncouples circadian oscillators in peripheral tissues from the central pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Genes Dev . 2000:14(23):2950-2961. https:// doi.org/10.1101/gad.183500
- 103. Stokkan KA, Yamazaki  S, Tei H, Sakaki Y, Menaker  M. Entrainment  of  the  circadian  clock  in  the  liver  by  feeding. Science .  2001:291(5503):490-493.  https://doi.org/10.1126/science. 291.5503.490
- 104. Rudic  RD,  McNamara  P,  Curtis  AM,  Boston  RC,  Panda  S, Hogenesch JB, Fitzgerald GA. BMAL1 and CLOCK, two essential components  of  the  circadian  clock,  are  involved  in  glucose homeostasis. PLoS Biol . 2004:2(11):e377. https://doi.org/10.1371/ journal.pbio.0020377
- 105. Kornmann  B,  Schaad  O,  Bujard  H,  Takahashi  JS,  Schibler  U. System-driven and oscillator-dependent circadian transcription in mice  with a conditionally active liver clock. PLoS Biol . 2007:5(2):0179-0189. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0050034
- 106. Guan D, Xiong Y, Trinh TM, Xiao Y, Hu W, Jiang C, Dierickx P, Jang C, Rabinowitz JD, Lazar MA. The hepatocyte clock and feeding control chronophysiology of multiple liver cell types. Science . 2020:369(6509):1388. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba8984
- 107. Carroll  RG,  Timmons  GA,  Cervantes-Silva  MP,  Kennedy  OD, Curtis AM. Immunometabolism around the Clock. Trends Mol Med . 2019:25(7):612-625. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed. 2019.04.013
- 108. Yvan-Charvet L, Ng LG. Granulopoiesis and neutrophil homeostasis: a metabolic, daily balancing act. Trends Immunol . 2019:40(7):598-612. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.it.2019.05.004
- 109. Tannahill GM, Curtis AM, Adamik J, Palsson-McDermott EM, McGettrick AF, Goel G, Frezza C, Bernard NJ, Kelly B, Foley NH, et  al. Succinate is  an  inflammatory  signal  that  induces  IL-1 β through  HIF-1 α . Nature . 2013:496(7444):238-242.  https://doi. org/10.1038/nature11986
- 110. Jantsch J, Chakravortty D, Turza N, Prechtel AT, Buchholz B, Gerlach  RG,  Volke  M,  Gläsner  J,  Warnecke  C,  Wiesener  MS, et al. Hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha modulate lipopolysaccharide-induced dendritic cell activation and function. J Immunol . 2008:180(7):4697-4705. https://doi.org/10.4049/ jimmunol.180.7.4697
- 111. Wu Y, Tang D, Liu N, Xiong W, Huang H, Li Y, Ma Z, Zhao H, Chen P, Qi X, et al. Reciprocal regulation between the circadian clock and hypoxia signaling at the genome level in mammals. Cell Metab . 2017:25(1):73-85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet. 2016.09.009
- 112. Everts B, Amiel E, Huang SCC, Smith AM, Chang CH, Lam WY, Redmann  V,  Freitas  TC,  Blagih  J,  van  der  Windt  GJ, et  al. TLR-driven  early  glycolytic  reprogramming  via  the  kinases TBK1-IKK ɛ supports the anabolic demands of dendritic cell activation. Nat  Immunol . 2014:15(4):323-332.  https://doi.org/10. 1038/ni.2833
- 113. Rodríguez-Prados J-C, Través PG, Cuenca J, Rico D, Aragonés J, Martín-Sanz P, Cascante M, Boscá L. Substrate fate in activated macrophages: a comparison between innate, classic, and alternative  activation. J  Immunol .  2010:185(1):605-614.  https://doi. org/10.4049/jimmunol.0901698
- 114. Cervantes-Silva MP, Carroll RG, Wilk MM, Moreira D, Payet CA, O'Siorain JR, Cox SL, Fagan LE, Klavina PA, He Y. The circadian clock influences T cell responses to vaccination by regulating dendritic  cell  antigen  processing. Nat  Commun . 2022:13(1): 1-18. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34897-z