## Peripheral lood Neutrophil  Production  of  Interleukin-1 B Receptor  Antagonist  and Interleukin-ll3

MARK MALYAK, 1"2  M I C H A E L F.  SMITH,  JR.,    ASHLEY 1 A. ABEL, 1  and WILLIAM P.  AREND 1

Accepted:  ugust  13,  1993 A

The objective   this tudy as to  characterize terleuof s w in kin-1 eceptor  ntagonist  IL-lra)  d  interleukin-ll3  r a ( an (IL 113) roduction y human  peripheral  lood  neutrophils p b b (polymorphonuclear  leukocytes;  MN). P Unstimulated PMN  contained L-lra  rotein  n  the  absence f  IL-lra I p i o mRNA; IL-113 RNA m and protein ere undetectable. w Lipopolysaecharide  PS),  granulocyte/macrophage  ol(L c ony-stimulating  actor GM-CSF),  and tumor necrosis f ( factor-alpha NF-et),  ndividually,  ansiently  creased (T i tr in IL-lra teady-state  NA s mR levels  n  PMN,  with  associi ated  increases  n  IL-lra rotein ynthesis.  PS, GMi p s L CSF, and TNF-ot generated  similar  ncreases  n  IL-113 i i mRNA,  yet  only PS resulted   detectable nthesis L in sy of IL-113 rotein.  L-4  enhanced  LPS-induced  IL-lra  rop I p duction y  PMN b and inhibited  PS-induced  IL-113 roL p duction. L-lra  rotein  resent  ithin  stimulated  MN I p p w P supernatants xisted  n  the  22-  to  25-kD glycosylated e i form. Polymerase  chain reaction mplification  etera d mined that nly  sIL-lra  RNA o m was  present  ithin timw s ulated MN,  iclL-lra  RNA P m was undetectable.  ese Th results dicate  hat  reshly olated N  possess    small in t f is PM a amount of  IL-lra  rotein  nd  that  hese  ells  an  respond p a t c c to  stimuli  ith  a  low  level f  sIL-lra  ranscription  d w o t an translation.  N PM may be a major  source  of  IL-lra  n i inflammatory xudates  here  these ells  redominate. e w c p

KEY  WORDS: Polymorphonuclear ukocyte;  terleukin-1 le in receptor  ntagonist; erleukin-l~; kines;  flammation. a int cyto in

## INTRODUCTION

IL-113  is  a 17-kD cytokine ith  multiple mmunow i modulatory  and proinflammatory  ffects  hat ikely e t l play  important oles n  various cute  and chronic r i a

inflammatory  disorders 1-3). lthough tradition-( A ally onsidered  product  predominantly f  monoc a o cytes nd macrophages,  numerous other ell ypes a c t including  uman peripheral ood  neutrophils olyh bl (p morphonuclear  leukocytes;  MN) P are  capable  of producing  IL-1B,  albeit  t  lower  levels  4-6). he a ( T extremely  high concentrations  f PMN o found in certain nflammatory  conditions ay  compensate i m for  the  low levels f  IL-113  synthesized  er  cell, o p resulting   a  significant  ntribution   IL-113 o  the in co of t inflammatory ilieu. m

Interleukin-1  eceptor ntagonist IL-lra)  omr a ( c petitively hibits  inding  of  IL-lot nd IL-113  to in b a human types   and  II L-1  receptors  2, -9). L-lra I I ( 7 I has no detectable  gonist  activity  espite aving a d h 30% amino acid equence  homology  with  IL-113 nd s a 19%  with IL-lot.  umerous  studies ave demonN h strated  he  ability   IL-lra o  abrogate he  effects t of t t of  IL-1  in   variety  f a o in  vitro systems  and  in  animal models of inflammatory  disease  (10-16). hough T the ability  f peripheral  lood PMN o b to produce IL-lra as  been  demonstrated n  other aboratories h i l (17-19), hese  studies id  not  investigate e  spet d th cific  orms  of  IL-lra  ynthesized  slL-lra d  iclLf s ( n lra),  he  ability   PMN t of to  glycosylate d  actively an secrete  L-lra,  r  the  effects   IL-4  upon  lipopolyI o of saccharide  LPS)-induced  L-lra  nd  IL-113 roduc-( I a p tion. ur laboratory  as  recently  emonstrated he O h d t ability  f  PMN o present ithin  synovial luid rom w f f patients  ith a variety f  inflammatory  arthropaw o thies o  produce  IL-lra 20). t (

IL-lra  exists s two forms which are  different a products f  the  same gene,  resulting  rom alternao f tive irst  xons  and RNA f e splicing  21). lL-lra,  r ( s o secretory  L-lra,  as  a  leader equence,  s lycosyI h s i g lated n  all ystems  studied,  s  effectively  creted i s i se by cells,  nd is  the  predominant  IL-lra pecies f a s o monocytes  and macrophages,  iclL-lra,   intracelor

lular  L-lra,  acks   leader equence,  s  not  glycoI l a s i sylated,  emains  intracellular  systems  thus  far r in studied,  nd  is redominantly  product f  epithelial a p a o cells.  he  specific  orms of IL-lra roduced  by T f p PMN  have  not  previously  een  determined. b fects f  granulocyte-macrophage lony-stimulat-  Cape Cod, Inc.,  oods  Hole,  MA). This  level  as with  one  or  ore  of he ollowing: S m t f LP (Escherichia coli 055:B5,  Difco  Laboratories,  troit, ),  GMDe MI CSF  (Genetics  nstitute,  mbridge,  MA), TNF-oL I Ca (Genzyme  Institute, mbridge, MA),  and IL-4 Ca (DNAX, Palo Alto,  CA). All culture onditions c contained  &lt;1.6 pg/ml LPS  as determined y the b Limulus amoebocyte lysate ssay  (Associates  f a o W w well  below  the inimum  stimulatory ncentration m co for  IL-lra  r  IL-113 roduction  y  peripheral ood o p b bl PMN (data  not  shown).  Culture  conditions  ere w modified or etabolic  abeling  s  discussed  elow. f m l a b

In  order o  further  haracterize  -lra  nd  IL-113 t c IL a production nd secretion  y human PMN,  the  efa b o co ing  factor  GM-CSF),  tumor  necrosis  actor-alpha ( f (TNF-et),  nterleukin-4 -4),  nd  bacterial S on i (IL a LP IL-lra nd IL-113  peptide nd mRNA a a levels  ere w studied.  etabolic  labeling  nd glycanase tudies M a s were  performed n  order o  determine he  predomi t t inant ize  and degree f  glycosylation    IL-lra  n s o of i PMN.  Finally,  pecific  olymerase  chain  reaction s p (PCR) amplification    iclL-lra d  slL-lra  RNA of an m was performed o  determine  he  potential ntribut t co tions  of  these  two forms  to  the  total L-lra roI p duced  by  human PMN.

## METHODS

Isolation  f eripheral  lood  PMN. o P B PMN were isolated  rom  the eripheral ood  of  normal  donors f p bl by a modification  f  a previously  escribed  roceo d p dure  (22). riefly, xtran edimentation  f  periphB de s o eral lood  anticoagulated th  sodium citrate  as b wi w performed  in  order o  remove  the  major  portion f t o red  blood ells  RBC).  Lymphoprep  gradient  entrifc ( c ugation as then  performed n  the hite  blood  cell w o w (WBC)-rich  supernatant, llowed y  harvest  f  the fo b o cell  ellet ntaining  MN p co P and  RBC. Contaminating RBC  were  lysed y  hypotonic  aline;  ormal  osmob s n larity s reconstituted hin  0  see. he  remaining wa wit 3 T cells  ere  washed  with anks'  buffered  alt  olution w H s s (HBSS) prior  o  suspension  n  culture  edium,  cont i m sisting   RPMI  1640  (Mediatec,  nc.,  erndon, A) of I H V with  I  mM  L-glutamine, 0  i~g/ml  treptomycin,  0 10 s 10 U/ml  penicillin, d 2% an heat-inactivated,  wlo endotoxin etal  alf erum  (FCS) (Hyclone  Laboraf c s tories,  nc.,  ogan,  UT).  All  isolation eps xcept I L st e dextran  sedimentation  ere performed  at  4~ w in order  to  prevent nadvertent  timulation  f  PMN i s o during  the  isolation ocedure.  fficiency   RBC pr E of sedimentation   dextran  as significantly  ited  t by w lim a 4~  and  was therefore rformed t  room temperape a ture.  ll  preparations re &gt;99%  PMN A we by Wright stain, th  monocyte  contamination  0.5% by  stainwi &lt; ing  for onspecific terase. n es

Culture  of  Peripheral  lood  PMN. B PMN were cultured  t  37~ a in  5%  COz  at  a concentration of 5 GLYPH&lt;141&gt; 106 cells/ml   medium alone r  in  combination in o

IL-lra  nd  IL-l  l  rotein  ssays. a f P A Protein  ssays a were performed  on lysates  nd supernatants  rom a f 5 GLYPH&lt;141&gt; 106 PMN cultured  n  l-ml olumes  on 15-mm i v plates.  hese  cultures re  performed n  duplicate. T we i After  supernatants  ere harvested, ell  lysates w c were  obtained  y  the ddition  f  1  ml  medium to he b a o t cells,  ollowed y three reeze/thaw  ycles.  L-lra f b f c I and IL-l[3 rotein oncentrations   PMN p c in lysates and culture  upernatants re determined y spes we b cific  andwich nzyme-linked  mmunosorbent  assay s e i (ELISA).  The IL-lra  LISA, recently  escribed  n E d i detail y our laboratory,  tilized  ffinity-purified b u a rabbit  gG antibodies  pecific  or  recombinant uI s f h man sIL-lra  s  the rimary ntibodies; e  seconda p a th ary  antibodies re  the iotinylated  G  fraction we b Ig of this  antiserum  (23).  The  IL-lra LISA  detected E both  structural  riants  f L-lra  nd  did ot  detect va o I a n IL-loL  or  IL-113 t  concentrations   to  100 ng/ml. a up Furthermore,  the antibodies etected  both the d 17-kD native nd the  22-kD glycosylated rms  of a fo IL-lra  as determined  by Western blot  analysis. IL-113 rotein  oncentrations  re  measured  utilizp c we ing  a sensitive ndwich  ELISA  in  which the  prisa mary antibody  was  a murine mAb specific  or f recombinant  uman IL-113 compliments  f  Dr.  Ann h ( o Berger, pjohn  Inc.,  alamazoo,  MI).  The secondU K ary  antibodies  ere the  IgG fraction  rom rabbit w f sera btained fter  yperimmunization  ith  recomo a h w binant uman IL-113 24). he IL-113 LISA detects h ( T E all f  the 7  kD processed  orm  but  may only etect o 1 f d 10-15% of  the  intracellular  kD precursor  orm. 31 f The sensitivities  the  IL-lra nd  IL-113  ELISA of a were approximately 0 pg/ml,  ELISA  was  per2 formed  in  triplicate  ach  supernatant  nd  lysate fore a sample. rotease  nhibitors  ded  to  cell  ysates  id P i ad l d not significantly  ter L-lra  and IL-l[3  protein al I levels  s  determined  y  ELISA. a b

Extraction f  RNA o and Analysis  by in Vitro Hybridization. Total  cellular  NA R was  obtained from 45 GLYPH&lt;141&gt;  106 PMN cultured  n  9 ml in 100-ram i

plates y guanidinium  isothiocyanate traction b ex and cesium  chloride  radient  entrifugation  5). g c (2 These cells ere cultured n parallel  ith cells w i w cultured  n  15-ram  plates  sed  for rotein  etermii u p d nation. he following uantities  f  total ellular T q o c RNA  were applied  o  nitrocellulose er  in  prept pap aration  or  analysis  y slot-blot  bridization: f b hy 500 ng for  IL-113,  00 ng  for L-lra,  nd  5 ng  for 8S 1 I a 2 ribosomal  RNA.  Slot-blot bridization s perhy wa formed  in  duplicate  or  each  sample.  The IL-lra f cDNA  probe, enerously  rovided y Dr.  Stephen g p b P.  Eisenberg Synergen,  nc.,  oulder, O),  was a ( I B C purified  .7-kb 1 EcoRI fragment  excised rom the f plasmid ector.  he  IL-113 DNA  probe, xcised  s v T c e a a 480-bp PstI fragment  from the  plasmid  vector containing  he  entire  ortion  f  the  mature  IL-113 t p o sequence,  as a  generous ift  rom  Dr.  Donald  B. w g f Carter The  Upjohn  Co., alamazoo,  MI).  The  28S ( K cDNA  probe  was derived  rom  a  full-length  NA f eD sequence  as a 1.4-kb BamHI fragment  and was generously  rovided y Dr.  R. Mahalingam (Unip b versity  f  Colorado  Health  Sciences enter, eno C D ver,  CO). Prehybridization    the  RNA of samples, nick  translation    the  cDNA of probes, nd hybrid~ a ization ere performed  as previously  escribed w d (25). utoradiography  as performed  and quantiA w rated  utilizing ser  densitometry.  he  resultant la T densitometric  its  f  IL-lra  nd  IL-lf3  RNA, un o a m as determined  y the  area  under  the  curve  generated b by Gaussian  analysis, re corrected  or  possible we f variation   amounts  of  total  ellular A in c RN applied to  individual ots  y adjusting  or  the  amount of sl b f 28S ribosomal NA  present  n  each  condition. R i

Northern  blot  analysis  as performed  on total w cellular A  from  PMN RN stimulated  nder  various u conditions  n  order o  determine he  specificity i t t of the  IL-lra  DNA c probe  used  in  slot-blot  alysis. an Five  micrograms f  total  ellular A  was electroo c RN phoresed  within  1.2% agarose  gel, ollowed y a f b transfer  o  nitrocellulose er  and hybridization t pap with  the  radiolabeled -lra DNA IL c probe  as described  bove. a

Metabolic  abeling f MN. L o P PMN  were  isolated as  described  bove  and  subsequently shed  twice a wa with  methionine4ree  PMI  (ICN Biomedicals,  rR I vine, A). PMN  were  then  suspended n  methionC i ine-free  edium  (methionine-free MI,  1 mM m RP L-glUtamine,  00  ixg/ml  treptomycin,  0  U/ml  pen1 s 10 icillin,  d 0.5%  heat-inactivated, -endotoxin an low FCS), at a density  of 1 x 108 cells/ml  n 1-ml i aliquots,  d  incubated  t 7~  for 5  min.  The  cells an a 3 1 were  then  harvested, llowed  y the  addition  f  1 fo b o

ml of methionine-free dium  with 200  ~Ci/ml me trans  5S  label ICN Biomedicals)  s  the  source f 3 ( a o radiolabeled  ethionine. hese cells ere incum T w bated  at  37~ for  4 hr  in  the  presence f  5 ~g/ml o LPS, 1  ng/ml  TNF-a, 1  ng/ml  GM-CSF,  or  medium alone.  ulture upernatants re  then arvested  s C s we h a described  bove. a

N-Glycanase  Treatment  and Immunoprecipitation f etabolically  beled  PMN  Supernatants. o M La Twenty  microliters    35S-labeled  MN of P supernatant added  to  20 p~l  of  a  buffer  ontaining  .5  M c 0 Tris, 0,5% sodium dodecyl  sulfate  SDS),  and 50 mM ( 2-mercaptoethanol s boiled or  5 min,  followed wa f by the  addition  f  4.8  I~1  N-glycanase Genzyme o ( Institute), ~1 7.5% Nonidet  P-40,  and 54.2  ~1 20 water.  This solution  as  incubated vernight t w o a 37~  and  subsequently  oiled or  min to  halt he b f 5 t enzyme reaction.

Immunoprecipitation  IL-lra  rotein thin  oth f p wi b N-glycanase  reated  nd  untreated S-labeled  MN t a 35 P supernatants s performed hrough he  addition  f wa t t o 12  vol  of  buffer  10  mM ( Tris  pH  7.4, %  Nonidet 1 P-40,   mM  EDTA,  and  0.15   NaCI)  and  0.12 ol f 2 M v o rabbit olyclonal L-lra  anti-serum,  ollowed  by p I f gentle  rocking  overnight t 4~ a (17).  Sixteenhundredths  olume  of taphylococcal  otein conv S pr A jugated o  Sepharose  beads  (Sigma  Chemical  Co., t St. ouis, O)  swollen  n  the bove  buffer  as  then L M i a w added  to  each  sample, ollowed  y  gentle  ocking  t f b r a 4~  for 0  min. he  beads ere  then ashed  twice n 3 T w w i buffer. orty  microliters  f SDS-PAGE F o loading buffer as then  added to each sample  of  beads, w followed y boiling  or  2 min.  The samples  were b f subsequently lectrophoresed  n a  12% e i SDSpolyacrylamide  el. luorography as performed, g F w followed  y  gel rying nd  autoradiography. b d a

PCR Amplification  MN  slL-lra  nd  iclL-lra ofP a mRNA. Reverse  transcription  1 ~g of  total  elf c lular  NA,  prepared s  described  bove, as perR a a w formed  in  a 20-~1  reaction  ontaining  0  mM c 1 Tris (pH 8.3),  50 mM KC1,  1.5 mM MgC12,  2 mM dNTPs, 2 i~t f  a  random hexamer  mixture Boeho ( ringer  annheim, Indianapolis,  ),  1 ~l  of  RNAM IN sin  (Promega,  Madison,  WI), and 1 ~l  of  AMVreverse ranscriptase  romega). he reaction  as t (P T w carried  ut  at 2~  for 0  min,  followed  y  heating o 4 5 b to  95~  for   min.  The  samples ere  then laced n 5 w p i an ice  bath. IL-lra  nd icIL-lra  CR  amplificas a P tions  of  the  synthesized  DNA c were performed separately r ach  individual mple. s a  control, fo e sa A G3PDH  cDNA  was amplified  imultaneously  thin s wi the  same  reaction   used  for ndividual L-lra  nd as i sI a

iclL-lra  DNA  amplification.  ch PCR  amplificae Ea tion as performed s  a 50-~1  reaction, ntaining w a co 10 ~1 of  synthesized  DNA,  2.5  U  of  Taq DNA e polymerase  (Perkin lmer Cetus,  Norwalk, CT), E 200 ng each  of  the  3'  common IL-lra rimer,  5' p G3PDH primer, nd  3'  G3PDH a primer, nd  200 ng a of  either  he  5'  slL-lra  rimer  or  the  5'  iclL-lra t p primer.  The  sequences  (5'  to 3')  of  the  primers utilized re as  follows:  '  slL-lra, CCTCCGwe 5 GG CAGTCACCTAATCACTCT; 5'  iclL-lra, GGCA TACTGCCCGGGTGCTACTTTAT; common 3' IL-lra,  CGATGGATCCCTACTACTCGTCCTCCTGGAAGTA; 5'  G3PDH,  AAGGTGAAGGTCGGAGTCAACG; and  3' 3PDH,  CGATGGATCCCG TACTACTCGTCCTCCTGGAAGTA. Thirty cycles of  PCR  were performed, ach  cycle  consisting  f e o 94~ x  90 ec, 5~ s 4 x  90 ec, 5~ s 4 GLYPH&lt;141&gt; 90 ec,  and s 72~ x  90  sec.  The amplified  roducts ere then p w electrophoresed  thin   1% agarose el  containing wi a g

ethidium romide.  DNA b bands  were  visualized  y b UV  fluorescence.  e amplified  roduct f  G3PDH Th p o cDNA  consisted  f  315  bp,  and those  f IL-lra  nd o o s a iclL-lra nsisted  f  531 and  583  bp,  respectively. co o

## RESULTS

Effects  f PS, GM-CSF,  and TNF-a on IL-lra o L Steady-State NA  Levels and mR Protein Production by  PMN. Human  peripheral ood  PMN  production bl of  IL-lra rotein  and  teady-state -lra RNA p s IL m levels as imulated  y  LPS (5 ixg/ml),  -CSF st b GM (50 ng/ml),  and TNF-a  (25 ng/ml)  were examined. Northern  blot  analysis  f  total  ellular A o c RN from PMN stimulated  ith  LPS, GM-CSF,  and TNF-a w was first  erformed  in order  to demonstrate he p t specificity    the  slot-blot  bridization.  ese  reof hy Th suits  llustrate t  he L-lra  DNA  probe  detected i tha t I e only  the  1.8-kB  IL-lra  RNA m (Fig. ). 1

I-

9

| ne  ne  "1"  I"   | Iv"  "1"   | ne  Z      | ce  Z    | ne  "I"   | ne  "I"   |
|-------------------|------------|------------|----------|-----------|-----------|
| 0  v-  I-  I-  ~  | v-         | ~-         | I-.      | C~        | (X)       |
| m  ,-,            | I-         | I-         | I-       | ~         | I-        |
| D  n  o  "'  "'   | s .  12    | s  o  i  ~ | 9  U-  Z | 9  It.  Z | I.L  Z    |

Z

Fig. .  IL-lra  teady-state  NA 1 s mR levels  rom  peripheral ood  PMN f bl as  determined y b Northern lot nalysis. ve  micrograms  of  total  ellular A  was added  to  each  lane. b a Fi c RN PMN  at  5  x 106  cells/ml re  cultured  n  the resence f  LPS (5 I~g/ml), -CSF we i p o GM (50 ng/ml),  NF-a (25  ng/ml),  r  medium alone, for  e ndicated rations. me 0  was the T o th i u Ti point of  ompletion f  the  PMN c o isolation ocess. pr

<!-- image -->

18S--

<!-- image -->

Fig. .  Peripheral ood  PMN 2 bl IL-lra  teady-state  NA s mR levels (A)  and  IL-lra  rotein  roduction  B). he culture  onditions e p p ( T c ar identical   those n  Fig.  1.  Relative  teady-state  -lra  RNA to i s IL m levels nd total L-lra rotein roduction supernatants  nd a I p p ( a lysates)  re  expressed s  a  function  f  culture  uration.  rotein a a o d P levels ere determined  by ELISA.  IL-lra RNA w m levels re a expressed s  scanning nits  erived rom  slot-blot  alysis. e a u d f an Th protein ata  are  from one representative  periment  of five d ex performed; he  mRNA t data  are  from  the  same experiment.  he T sensitivity  the  IL-lra  LISA  in  this  xperiment  as 40  pg/ml. of E e w

<!-- image -->

Freshly  isolated MN P consistently  ontained c 0.4-0.6 g/ml  of  cell-associated  -lra rotein  n n IL p i the  absence  of  detectable  L-lra RNA I m (Fig. ). 2 Furthermore, otal L-lra  protein evels id not t I l d change significantly  er time  when  PMN ov were cultured  n  medium  alone; L-lra RNA i I m steadystate  levels emained  undetectable  r very  low. r o

Table I.  Fraction  f  Total L-lra  roduced  by Peripheral o I P Blood  PMN Present n  Cell  Lysates" i

| Culture ondition  c   | Fraction  f  IL-lra  o in  PMN  lysates   |
|-----------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Medium                | 0.76  +-  0.07                            |
| LPS                   | 0.56  ---  .06  0                         |
| GM-GSF                | 0.70  - 0.09                              |
| TNF-~x                | 0.63  ---  .10  0                         |
| IL-4                  | 0.60  \_-. .07  0                          |
| IL-4/LPS              | 0.48  \_+  0.11                            |

aPMN  were cultured  n  the  presence f  medium  alone, PS  (5 i o L ~g/ml),  GM-CSF (50 ng/ml),  TNF-a  (25 ng/ml),  IL-4 (100 ng/ml),  r  a  combination  f  IL-4  (100  ng/ml) nd  LPS (10  i~g/ml) o o a for  22  hr. ata  are  the  mean - SE from  six xperiments. D e

These  data uggested  hat he  isolation ocess nd s t t pr a long-term  culture n medium  alone successfully i avoided  inadvertent imulation   PMN. st of

LPS, GM-CSF,  and  TNF-a all ndividually  imui st lated  roduction  f  IL-lra  rotein  y  cultured  MN p o p b P (Fig. B).  Less  than  50%  of  the  synthesized  L-lra 2 I protein as secreted  nder  all  culture onditions, w u c except or he ombination  f  LPS and  IL-4 Table ). f t c o ( I Steady-state -lra RNA IL m levels s stimulated  y a b LPS, GM-CSF,  or  TNF-(x  all xhibited  imilar  inete s k ics,  ith  high evels  nduced y 1  hr  and  subsequent w l i b rapid alls  y 8 hr  (Fig. A).  The concentrations f b 2 of LPS,  GM-CSF,  and  TNF-e~  used ere  all  reater an w g th the  lowest oncentration  ving  aximal  stimulation, c gi m as  determined y dose-response  xperiments.  ulb e C ture f  PMN o on plates  oated ith  adherent  uman c w h IgG  failed  timulate -lra  ynthesis.  herent gG tos IL s Ad I is   powerful  timulant  L-lra  roduction  y  monoa s ofI p b cytes nd,  thus, s  further  vidence hat ontaminaa i e t c tion  of  PMN preparations  y monocytes  is  not  reb sponsible  or he  observed esults. f t r

Effects  f  LPS, GM-CSF, o and TNF-a on IL-1[3 Steady-State NA  Levels nd  Protein  roduction mR a P by  PMN.  The effects   LPS, GM-CSF,  and  TNF-et of upon PMN IL-113  steady-state NA mR levels nd a protein roduction re  shown in  Fig.  3.  Although p a the  kinetics  f  IL-113 elative eady-state NA o r st mR levels  ere similar  o  those bserved ith  IL-lra, w t o w only  LPS  was  capable  of stimulating  etectable d IL-113  protein roduction. M-CSF p G and TNF-ot treatment  nhanced  IL-1B  mRNA e levels  ransiently t but  resulted  n  no increase  n  IL-113 rotein  evels i i p l over  those bserved ith  PMN o w cultured  n  medium i alone.  Additionally, lture f PMN cu o in medium alone  resulted  n  no significant  creases  n  IL-l[3 i in i mRNA levels,  uggesting  gain  that he  isolation s a t process nd culture  n  medium alone  did  not  stima i ulate he  PMN. t

<!-- image -->

Pig. .  Peripheral  lood  PMN 3 b IL-113 teady-state NA s mR levels (A)  and  IL-113 rotein  roduction  B). he  culture  onditions d p p ( T c an data  expression re  identical  o  those  in  Fig.  2.  The protein a t results re from one representative periment  of five  pera ex formed;  the  mRNA data  are  from  the  same experiment.

<!-- image -->

Effects  f L-4, PS, and Combinations  of L-4 o I L I and LPS upon 1L-lra  Steady-State  RNA m Levels and Protein roduction  by PMN. P Since  IL-4  has been described  to enhance LPS-induced IL-lra production  in human  monocytes (26-28),  PMN were  examined  for  the  same phenomenon.  LPS  or IL-4,  individually,  creased  MN in P IL-lra rotein p levels  y  2.5- o .0-fold d  1.2- o  1.5-fold,  specb t 5 an t re tively,  ompared  with  culture  n  medium  alone  as c i determined  in four  experiments. owever, the H combination  of LPS  and IL-4 increased L-lra I production  .0- o  12.5-fold  ompared  with  medium 4 t c

Fig. 4. Peripheral  lood  PMN b production f  IL-lra rotein n o p i response o  varying oncentrations    IL-4  and  LPS. PMN  were t c of cultured  t   density  f  x  106  cells/ml r 2  hr  in he resence a a o 5 fo 2 t p of  different  mbinations  f  IL-4 nd  LPS as  shown.  The results co o a are  from  one  representative  periment f  four erformed. ex o p

<!-- image -->

alone  (Fig. ).  Examination  of  individual  xperi4 e ments revealed hat  the  combination f  IL-4  and t o LPS may have  been  more than  additive  ompared c with  LPS  or  IL-4  alone. he relative eady-state T st IL-lra RNA m levels  n  PMN i corresponded o  the t protein  levels,  ith greater mounts of IL-lra w a mRNA present ith  the  combination f  IL-4  and w o LPS  compared with  IL-4  or  LPS  alone  (data ot n shown).  Furthermore, he  kinetics  f  the  IL-lra t o mRNA levels ith  IL-4  and LPS  in  combination w were  comparable  to  those f  GM-CSF,  TNF-ot,  or o LPS  alone, ith  peak  levels  bserved ithin  1 hr w o w and subsequent  rapid  decreases hrough  22 hr. t PMN cocultured  ith  LPS  and  either  M-CSF w G or TNF-et  resulted   less ramatic  less  han wo-fold) in d ( t t increases  n  IL-lra  roduction  ompared  with  culi p c ture n  either  ytokine  lone data ot  shown). i c a ( n

Effects  f L-4, PS, and Combinations  of  IL-4 o I L and LPS upon IL-113 teady-State  RNA S m Levels and Protein  Production  by PMN. In contrast  o t induction f  IL-lra ynthesis,  L-4  has been obo s I served o  inhibit  PS-induced L-113 roduction  y t L I p b human  monocytes (26-28). MN P cultured  n  the i presence f  IL-4  alone  did  not  produce  detectable o levels  f  IL-113 Fig. ). he addition  f  increasing o ( 5 T o amounts of  IL-4 to three  concentrations   LPS of resulted n a  dose-dependent  decrease  in the i amount of  synthesized  L-113 rotein  y PMN I p b cultured or  22 hr  compared  to  cells  ultured  n  LPS f c i alone.  L-4  at oncentrations   reater  han  1  ng/ml I c ofg t

Fig.  5.  Peripheral  lood  PMN b production f  IL-I~  protein n o i response o  varying oncentrations    IL-4  and  LPS. The  culture t c of conditions  re  identical   those n  Fig. .  The results  re  from a to i 4 a one  representative experiment  our erformed. of  f p

<!-- image -->

was capable f  reducing LPS-stimulated  113 roo ILp duction n  PMN i by up to  50%. Conversely,  MN P cocultured  n  LPS  and either  GM-CSF  or  TNF-oc i

rhlL-Ira -

led  to  a  slight  less  han  wofold)  ncrease  n  IL-113 ( t t i i synthesis  ompared to  culture  n  LPS  alone  (data c i not shown).  Steady-state  RNA m studies emond strated  hat L-4  alone esulted   barely  etectable t I r in d increases  n  IL-113 RNA i m levels  ver  time  in  culo ture  (data ot  shown).  In  contrast  o  the  protein n t results, e  combination f  IL-4  and LPS  did  not th o result  n  II\_,-113 NA i mR levels  ignificantly ferent s dif from those  seen  with PS  alone.  Furthermore, L similar inetics  ere observed, ith peak IL-113 k w w mRNA levels ithin  1 hr and with  rapid  falls  in w steady-state  vels  y  8  hr. le b

35S  Metabolic Labeling and N-Glycanase tTr a ment of PMN Supernatants. In the  presence  of 35S-labeled ethionine, MN m P were cultured  ith w LPS, GM-CSF,  TNF-oL, or  medium alone. n  order I to  examine  if L-lra rotein  ynthesized  y PMN I p s b during  culture  s  glycosylated,  mples  of  culture i sa supernatants  ere  treated  ith  N-glycanase.  ntiw w A IL-lra  mmunoprecipitation    supernatant mples i of sa was then  performed,  ollowed y gel  electrophoref b sis  and autoradiography  Fig.  6).  These results ( demonstrated  hat he  majority  f  the  extracellular t t o

Fig. .  Molecular  eights f L-lra  rotein  resent  n eripheral ood  PMN 6 w o I p p i p bl supernatants e- nd  post-carbohydrate  gestion. pr a di PMN  were  35S  labeled  n he presence of  (5  ~g/ml),  M-CSF i t LPS G (1  ng/ml), TNF-ec   ng/ml),  r  medium alone or   hr. liquots (1 o f 4 A of  culture  upernatants  ere either  igested  ith  N-glycanase +)  or  not  (-),  ollowed y  anti-IL-lra unoprecipitation. s w d w ( f b imm These  samples  were  subsequently  lectrophoresed    a 12%  polyacrylamide  el.  igration f  radiolabeled  -kD nonglycosyle in g M o 17 ated  recombinant uman slL-lra  s hown.  The larger  pecies  n  the  undigested samples  e  approximately  3 kD in  size. h i s s i ar 2

<!-- image -->

IL-lra  as in  the  22-  to  25-kD glycosylated rm. w fo When  these  samples  were treated  ith  N-glycaw nase, he  resultant -lra  rotein  pecies  igrated t IL p s m with  non-glycosylated  man recombinant lL-lra. hu s LPS, GM-CSF,  or  TNF-(x stimulation  f  PMN o all resulted  n extracellular  -lra hat  was present i IL t primarily  s  the  glycosylated rm. a fo

PCRAmplification  f MN  slL-lra  nd  iclL-lra o P a mRNA. In order  to examine if  PMN synthesize iclL-lra  n  addition  o  sIL-lra,  nd to  determine i t a specifically if  L-lra  ay be contributing   the icI m to IL-lra  resent  ntracellularly in he MN,  PCR p i with t P amplification   slL-lra  nd icIL-lra  NA of a R within PMN  total  ellular A  was performed Fig.  ). n c RN ( 7 I this  experiment, MN P cultured  n  medium  alone i expressed    low  level  f lL-lra  RNA, a o s m which  was substantially  creased  y stimulation th  LPS or in b wi GM-CSF. However, no iclL-lra  RNA m was detectable  nder  any condition.  n  a control  xperiu I e

ment,  only  the  iclL-lra  rimers mplified RNA p a m from  the 431 human keratinocyte  ne.  hese  data A li T indicate  hat MN t P express xclusively L-lra  nd e sl a suggest hat he  cell-associated lra  s  not  of  the t t ILi iclL-lra rm. fo

## DISCUSSION

These  studies  ave  described   detail  he  charh in t acteristics  IL-lra  nd  IL-113 ynthesis  nd  secreof a s a tion  by human  peripheral  lood PMN. b Freshly isolated  ormal  peripheral  lood  PMN n b contained ~--100 g IL-lra  rotein/106  ells  n  the  absence  f p p c i o detectable  L-lra RNA. I m This  preexisting  -lra IL protein  ould  not  be accounted or y inadvertent c f b stimulation ring he  isolation ocess r  by  ongodu t pr o ing  low-level ranslation.  ther,  the  PMN t Ra may have  synthesized d  stored  L-lra  uring ifferenan I d d tiation  nd maturation ithin  the marrow; cona w

slL-  1  ra  icIL-  1  ra u\_ coZ) 03 c a , a , Oq t\_\_ (-

Fig. .  PCR  amplification    slL-lra  nd  iclL-lra NA 7 of a mR from  peripheral ood  PMN.  PMN bl were  cultured  n  the resence f  LPS (5 }xg/ml),  -CSF i p o GM (50  ng/mI), r  medium alone or o f 8 hr.  slL-lra  nd iclL-lra  mRNA  primers  were utilized   separate eactions  fter everse a in r a r transcription  total cellular   G3PDH  mRNA f RNA. was amplified  n  each  sample  as  a  control. i The  sizes  f he DNA  products re s  follows:  lL-lra,  1  bp;  iclL-lra,  3  bp;  and  G3PDH, o t c a a s 53 58 315  bp.  The lowest and  present  n  all  amples  represents plified  3PDH b i s am G cDNA.  Control experiments  ith  keratinocyte A  indicated  atisfactory  plification    icIL-lra NA. w RN s am of mR

<!-- image -->

versely,  L-lra ay have  been adsorbed  onto  the I m surface  f  the MN o P from  an  exterior urce ithin so w the  marrow or  blood.  Subcellular  ocalization  l ex periments re  under  way in  an attempt o  answer a t these  questions. reshly  isolated MN F P did not contain  L-113 RNA I m or  protein. -CSF,  TNF-et, GM and  LPS each  were  capable f  stimulating ansient o tr increases  n  IL-lra  teady-state  NA i s mR levels  ssoa ciated  ith  the  synthesis   IL-lra  rotein  o  levels w of p t 2.5-  to  4.5-fold  bove those  in  PMN a cultured  n i medium alone.  he majority  f  this L-lra  as not T o I w secreted  y  the MN b P but  remained ell-associated. these  observations  n PMN c GM-CSF,  TNF-et,  and  LPS stimulated  ncreases i in IL-113 teady-state  NA s mR levels  ith  kinetics mw i ilar  o hose f L-lra  RNA,  yet nly PS resulted t t o I m o L in  a  detectable crease  n  IL-113 rotein  ynthesis. in i p s

McColl et  al. (17) ave  recently monstrated  he h de t ability  f  peripheral ood  PMN o bl to  synthesize  LI Ira rotein.  nterestingly,  hat eport  otal  L-lra p I in  t r t I protein  evels  n  cultured  nstimulated  MN l i u P were approximately  8-fold reater  han  in  the  present 1 g t study. urthermore,  n  McColl's  studies  PS  did F i L not  induce MN P IL-lra  rotein  ynthesis. -CSF p s GM and  TNF-(x induced   less han  twofold ncrease  n a t i i total  L-lra  rotein  roduction  ompared  with  conI p p c trois  t   hr, onsistent  th ur  results.  fferences a 4 c wi o Di in  culture  onditions, cluding  ell oncentrations c in c c and the  amount of  FCS  in  the  medium, may have contributed   these arying bservations.   other to v o In studies,  PS  was  demonstrated  to be a potent L inducer f  IL-lra  rotein  roduction  y peripheral o p p b blood  PMN (18,  19).

The maximal amounts  of  IL-lra  er  PMN p (--1.0 ng/106  cells)   stimulated   the  most  potent timas by s ulus  (IL-4  and LPS)  in  our studies re  approxia mately  1%  of  the  maximal amounts produced  by peripheral  lood  monocytes  cultured  n adherent b o IgG, their  most  potent  stimulus  (24).  LPSstimulated  MN P exhibit  pproximately  %  of  the a 1 IL-lra  rotein  er  cell  roduced y  LPS-stimulated p p p b monocytes  (24)  and  2%  of  that roduced  constitup tively  y b in vitro-derived macrophages  (29).  The absence  of  IL-lra  roduction  y  PMN p b cultured  n o adherent gG (data ot  shown),  in  addition  o  the I n t e cells n the PMN i preparations,  stablishes  hat e t monocyte  contamination  s  not  responsible r  the i fo observed L-lra  roduction. I p

protein ynthesis  ompared with  LPS  alone. he s c T fact hat elative eady-state  -lra RNA t r st IL m levels paralleled  otein  evels  uggests  hat  he nhancing pr l s t t e effects  f  LPS  may be mediated  at  transcriptional o and/or osttranscriptional ls.  L-4  alone id  not p leve I d increase  L-113 rotein  ynthesis  nd  markedly  deI p s a creased PS-induced  IL-113 rotein  ynthesis en L p s wh PMN were cocultured  ith  LPS  and IL-4.  Howw ever,  IL-4 did  not reduce  LPS-stimulated  L-113 I mRNA levels,  uggesting  hat he  IL-4  effects re s t t we mediated  at  the  posttranscriptional l.  lthough leve A i are new, analogous results  ere noted  in  similar  xperiments  tilizing w e u peripheral  lood  mononuclear  cells 26-28). anb ( V nier et aL (26)  demonstrated hat  IL-4  enhanced t LPS-induced  IL-lra ynthesis  n  PBMC s i by threefold nd  decreased  PS-induced L-113 ynthesis a L I s by more than  fivefold. ino Or et  aL (27)  and  Fenton et aL (28)  published  imilar  ata tilizing  ghly uris d u hi p fied eripheral ood  monocytes. p bl

Our  studies emonstrated  that  PMN d produce only  slL-lra  RNA; m no icIL-lra  RNA m was detected y PCR  amplification.  rthermore,  t  has b Fu i been  documented  for  the  first me, hrough etai t m bolic abeling  xperiments  nd  carbohydrate  igesl e a d tion,  that  only  the  glycosylated  orm of IL-lra f protein  ppears n  the  supernatant. a i

This  study  has  confirmed hat eripheral  lood t p b PMN are  capable  of  being  stimulated  o  actively t synthesize  L-lra  rotein.  urthermore,  his tudy I p F t s has  demonstrated  or  the  first me  that MN f i P produce  only  the  slL-lra  ariant, at he  synthesized v th t slL-lra  rotein  s  glycosylated,  d that MN p i an P are capable  of  secreting e  glycosylated rm  of  sILth fo lra rotein.  ut  the  majority  f  the  L-lra  as not p B o I w secreted  y  stimulated  MN,  suggesting  hat ying b P t d or dead PMN in local  tissues ay  be potential m sources f  IL-lra. o

presence  of &lt;0.5%  nonspecific  sterase-positive  cytokine  ontribution    PMN  may be  proinflammaAlthough  IL-4  alone nly inimally  ncreased  he o m i t synthesis  f  IL-lra y PMN,  the  combination f o b o IL-4  and  a  maximally timulatory ncentration s co of LPS  resulted  n a substantial crease n IL-lra i in i PMN  produced  IL-lra  t  levels  hree-  o  fourfold a t t greater  han  those  of  IL-113, epending  upon the t d stimulus.  owever,  at  least  0-  to  100-fold  reater H 1 g amounts of IL-lra  over IL-113  are  necessary o t block  50%  of  biological sponses  f  target  ells  o re o c t IL-1  (30). hus,  under  conditions  f  sepsis he  net T o t c of tory. owever, GM-CSF H and TNF-oL induced  ILlra ynthesis  nd  secretion   PMN s a by in  the bsence a of IL-113  protein roduction.  hus, in situations p T where  GM-CSF and  TNF-tx  may predominate,  uch s as  in  he nflamed ynovium  of  rheumatoid rthritis t i s a patients, lective N se PM production f  IL-lra ay o m serve  an  antiinflammatory  le. ro

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This  work was supported  y National nstitutes b I of  Health  Grants  AR40135  and  AR39950. Dr.  Malyak  was supported y the  Dr. Charley  J.  Smyth b Fellowship  in Rheumatology from the Rocky Mountain  Chapter  of  the  Arthritis undation nd Fo a is  the  recipient  f  a Clinical  nvestigator  ard o I Aw from the  National nstitutes    Health. e  thank I of W the  following  nvestigators  r  contributions    rei fo of agents: r.  Ann Berger  (Upjohn), Ab  to  IL-113; D m Dr.  Stephen .  Eisenberg  Synergen),  DNA  probe P ( c for  IL-lra;  r.  Donald  B. Carter Upjohn),  DNA D ( c probe  for  IL-113;  nd  Dr.  R.  Mahalingam (Univera sity f  Colorado  Health  Sciences enter),  DNA o C c probe  for 8S ribosomal NA. 2 R

## REFERENCES

- 1.  Arend  WP, Dayer  JM: Cytokines nd  cytokine  nhibitors a i or antagonists  heumatoid rthritis.  hritis  eum  33:305inr a Art Rh 315,  1990
- 2.  Dinarello  A: Interleukin-I   interleukin-1  tagonism. C and an Blood  77:1627-1652, 91 19
- 3.  Dinarello  A: Interleukin-1  d  its  iologically  lated  yC an b re c tokines.  dv Immunol  44:153-205,  989 A 1
- 4.  Marucha  PT, Zeff  RA,  Kreutzer L:  Cytokine-induced D IL-113  gene  expression n  the  human polymorphonuclear i leukocyte:  ranscriptional  d  post-transcriptional laT an regu tion  y  tumor ecrosis  actor  nd  IL-1.    Imrnunol 47:2603b n f a J 1 2608,  1991
- 5.  Marucha PT,  Zeff A, Kreutzer  L: Cytokine egulation R D r of IL-113  gene expression n  the  human polymorphonuclear i leukocyte.    Immunol  145:2932-2937, 90 J 19
- 6.  Lord PCW, Wilmoth LMG, McCall CE:  Expression  of intedeukin-lc~  d  f3 enes  by  human blood olymorphonuan g p clear  eukocytes.  Clin nvest  7:1312-1321, 91 l J I 8 19
- 7.  Arend  WP: Interleukin  eceptor  ntagonist:  new  member 1  r a A of  the ntedeukin  family.  Clin nvest  8:1445-1451, 91 i 1 J I 8 19
- 8.  Hannum CH, Wilcox  C  J, rend  WP, Joslin  G,  Dripps   J, A F D Heimdal  PL,  Armes  LG, Sommer A,  Eisenberg  P,  ThompS son  RC: Interleukin-1  ceptor  ntagonist tivity    a  hure a ac of man  interleukin-1  hibitor.  ture  (Lond.)  343:336-340, in Na 1990
- 9.  Eisenberg  P,  Evans  R  J, rend  WP, Verderber ,  Brewer S A E MT,  Hannum  CH, Thompson RC: Primary  structure d an functional  pression  rom  complementary NA  of   human ex f D a interleukin-1  ceptor  ntagonist. ture  (Lond.) 43:341re a Na 3 346,  1990
- 10.  Ohlsson ,  Bjork ,  Bergenfeldt  Hageman R,  Thompson K P M, RC:  Interleukin-1 ceptor  antagonist  educes  mortality re r from  endotoxin  hock. ature  (Lond.) 48:550-552,  990 s N 3 1
- 11.  Cominelli  ,  Nast  CC, Clark D, Schindler  ,  Llerena  , F B R R Eysselein  E, Thompson  RC, Dinarello  A: Interleukin V C 1 (IL-1)  ene  expression, nthesis, d  effect  pecific  -1 g sy an ofs IL receptor  lockade n abbit  mmune complex  colitis.  lin b i r i J  C Invest  6:972-980,  990 8 1
- 12.  Smith  RJ,  Chin  JE, am LM, Justen  M:  Biologic  ffects S J e of an  interleukin-1 eptor  ntagonist  rotein  n  interleukinrec a p o

- 1-stimulated  rtilage osion  nd  chondrocyte esponsiveca er a r ness.  rthritis  eum  34:78-83,  991 A Rh 1
- 13.  Opp MR,  Postlethwaite , Seyer  JM, Krueger M: InterAE J leukin    receptor  ntagonist ocks  somnogenic  and  pyro1 a bl genic esponses  o n  interleukin agment.  roc atl cad r t a 1  fr P N A Sci  USA  89:3726-3730,  992 1
- 14.  Granowitz  EV, Vannier ,  Poutsiaka D,  Dinarello  A: E D C Effect  f  interleukin-1 -1)  lockade n  cytokine  yntheo (IL b o s sis.  I.  L-1 eceptor  ntagonist hibits  popolysaccharideI I r a in li induced  cytokine ynthesis  y human monocytes.  Blood s b 79:2364-2369,  992 1
- 15.  Granowitz  EV,  Clark  BD,  Vannier  E, Callahan  MV, Dinarello  A:  Effect f  interleukin-1  L-1) lockade  on C o (I b cytokine ynthesis.  L-1  receptor  ntagonist  nhibits  s I.I a i IL l-induced tokine  ynthesis d  blocks he inding  f  IL-1 cy s an t b o to  its  ype I eceptor  n  human  monocytes. lood  79:2356t I r o B 2363,  1992
- 16.  Porat ,  Poutsiaka  D, Miller  C,  Granowitz V,  Dinarello R D L E CA: Interleukin-1  L-1)  eceptor lockade  reduces  endo(I r b toxin nd a Borrelia urgdorferi-stimulated b IL-8  synthesis in human mononuclear ells. SEB  J  6:2482-2486,  992 c FA 1
- 17.  McColl SR, Paquin  R, Menard C, Beaulieu D:  Human A neutrophils oduce  high evels  f he  interleukin  eceptor pr l o t 1  r antagonist  n  response o  granulocyte/macrophage lonyi t co stimulating  ctor  nd  tumor  necrosis  actor  t.    Exp Med fa a f c J 176:593-598,  992 1
- 18.  Ulich R, Guo K,  Yin  S,  del astillo  i  ES,  Thompson T C J,Y RC, Eisenberg  SP: Endotoxin-induced  ytokine  ene exc g pression in vivo. IV. Expression  of  interleukin-lodl3 and intedeukin-1  eceptor ntagonist  RNA r a m during  endotoxemia and during  endotoxin-initiated  al cute  inflammaloc a tion.  m  J  Pathol 41:61-68,  992 A 1 1
- 19.  Re F,  Mengozzi  M, Muzio M, Dinarello  A, Mantovani , C A Colotta :  Expression f  interleukin-1  ceptor ntagonist F o re a (IL-lra)    human circulating  lymorphonuclear  ells. r by po c Eu J  Immunol  23:570-573,  993 1
- 20.  Malyak  M, Swaney  RE,  Arend  WP: Levels f ynovial  luid o s f interleukin-1 eptor  ntagonist  heumatoid rthritis  d rec a inr a an other  arthropathies:  tential  ontribution  om synovial po c fr fluid  eutrophils.  thritis  eum  36:781-789,  993 n Ar Rh 1
- 21.  Haskill  ,  Martin  G,  Van Le L,  Morris , eace  A,  Bigler S J P CF, Jaffe  J,  Hammerberg  C, Sporn  SA, Fong S,  Arend G WP, Ralph  P: cDNA cloning  f  an  intracellular  m  of he o for t human intedeukin   receptor ntagonist  ssociated  ith 1 a a w epithelium. oc  Natl cad Sci  USA  88:3681-3685, 91 Pr A 19
- 22.  Haslett  , Guthrie A, Kopaniak  MM, C L Johnston,  r  RB, J Henson  PM: Modulation f ultiple  eutrophii nctions o m n fu by preparative  ethods or  trace  concentrations    bacterial m of lipopolysaccharide. J  Pathol 19:101-110,  985 Am 1 1
- 23.  Malyak M, Joslin  G,  Verderber L,  Eisenberg  P,  Arend F E S WP:  II.,-lra  ISA: Reduction  and  alkylation   synovial EL of fluid  liminates terference  IgM rheumatoid  factors. e in by J Immunol  Methods 140:281-288, 91 19
- 24.  Arend WP,  Smith,  Jr. F, Janson  RW,  Joslin G: IL-1 M F receptor  ntagonist  nd  IL-113 roduction  n  human monoa a p i cytes  are  regulated  ifferently.  mmunol 147:1530-1536, d J I 1991
- 25.  Arend  WP, Gordon  DF,  Wood  WM,  Janson W, Joslin  G, R F Jameel  S:  IL-113  roduction  ultured  uman monocytes s p inc h i regulated  t ultiple  evels.  Immunol 143:118-126,  989 a m l J 1
- 26.  Vannier ,  Miller C, Dinarello  A: Coordinated ntiinE L C a flammatory ffects   interleukin nterleukin  uppresses e of 4:  I 4  s

- interleukin  production ut  up-regulates ne  expression 1 b ge and  synthesis  nterleukin  eceptor  ntagonist.  oc  Natl ofi 1  r a Pr Sci  USA  89:4076-4080,  992 1
- 27.  Orino  E,  Sone S,  Nii  A, Ogura  T:  IL-4  up-regulates -1 IL receptor  ntagonist  ene  expression nd  its roduction n a g a p i human blood  monocytes.   Immunol  149:925-931,  992 J 1
- 28.  Fenton J,  Buras  JA,  Donnelly  P:  IL-4 eciprocally  guM R r re lates  L-1 nd  IL-1 eceptor  ntagonist pression  n uman I a r a ex i h monocytes.  J  Immunol  149:1283-1288, 92 19
- 29.  Janson  RW,  Hance KR, Arend WP:  Production  f  IL-1 o receptor ntagonist  y human  in  vitro-derived  croa b ma phages.  Effects f lipopolysaccharide d granulocyteo an macrophage  colony-stimulating tor.   Immunol 147: fac J 4218-4223,  1991
- 30.  Arend WP,  Welgus HG,  Thompson  RC,  Eisenberg P: S Biological  roperties  f recombinant uman  monocytep o h derived  interleukin  receptor ntagonist. Clin  Invest 1 a J 85:1694-1697,  990 1