## Role of neutrophils in innate immunity: a systems biology-level approach

<!-- image -->

Scott D. Kobayashi and Frank R. DeLeo ∗

The innate immune system is the first line of host defense against invading microorganisms. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs or neutrophils) are the most abundant leukocyte in humans and essential to the innate immune response against invading pathogens. Compared with the acquired immune response, which requires time to develop and is dependent on previous interaction with specific microbes, the ability of neutrophils to kill microorganisms is immediate, nonspecific, and not dependent on previous exposure to microorganisms. Historically, studies on PMN-pathogen interaction focused on the events leading to killing of microorganisms, such as recruitment/chemotaxis, transmigration, phagocytosis, and activation, whereas post-phagocytosis sequelae were infrequently considered. In addition, it was widely accepted that human neutrophils possessed limited capacity for new gene transcription and thus, relatively little biosynthetic capacity. This notion has changed dramatically within the past decade. Further, there is now more effort directed to understand the events occurring in PMNs after killing of microbes. Herein we review the systems biology-level approaches that have been used to gain an enhanced view of the role of neutrophils during hostpathogen interaction. We anticipate that these and future systems-level studies will ultimately provide information critical to our understanding, treatment, and control of diseases caused by pathogenic microorganisms.  2009 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc. WIREs Syst Biol Med 2009 1 309-333

P olymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs or neutrophils) are the most abundant cellular component of the host immune system and primary mediators of the innate immune response to invading microorganisms. The ability of neutrophils to rapidly kill invading microbes is indispensible for maintaining host health. Defects in neutrophil microbicidal processes or an overall decrease in PMN abundance are deleterious to human health and often result in severe and recurrent infections. In this regard, the neutrophil has garnered much respect and notoriety for its principal role as executioner. Although the net result of neutrophil function is killing of invading microorganisms, the steps leading up to the final act require careful orchestration and yield many options based on

complex signal transduction events. Inasmuch as neutrophils have significant potential to damage host cells and tissues, PMNs ultimately have go-no-go decisions that are important for the resolution of the inflammatory response. Therefore, an enhanced understanding of molecular signaling pathways induced in PMNs during these processes is critical for improving treatment and outcome of infectious diseases. To that end, genome-wide approaches have yielded significant insight into essential neutrophil processes such as granulopoiesis, host defense, and resolution of the inflammatory response (Figure 1).

The inception of systems biology as an independent field of study is a relatively recent occurrence. The goal of systems-level studies is to integrate comprehensive biological data sets from diverse experimental systems to understand complex interactions at the molecular level. In more simplistic terms, systems-level studies provide the prediction of phenotype changes in biological systems from a defined stimulus. In this regard, cells of the innate immune system (leukocytes)

FIGURE 1 | Overview of neutrophil functions/processes that have been investigated using proteomics (indicated by 2-D gel) or transcriptomics (indicated with a cDNA microarray). See text for details.

<!-- image -->

are highly amenable to systems biology approaches. Although leukocytes often overlap in function, there are distinct differences between cell types such as those pertaining to turnover and production of immunoregulators. Each type of leukocyte has a unique role in the immune response and generates lineage-specific gene expression patterns. Thus, a unified approach using a single representative cell type is unrealistic. Nevertheless, systems biology-level studies have provided important insight into the complex signal transduction pathways in both neutrophils and cells of the monocyte lineage. Herein, we review primary neutrophil functions and the genome-wide approaches used to better understand these processes. Collectively, these studies are an important first step toward developing a systems-level understanding of host-pathogen interactions.

## GRANULOCYTE DEVELOPMENT

## Do Human Neutrophils Possess Capacity for New Gene Transcription?

Inasmuch as the primary function of neutrophils is to protect the host from invading pathogens, significant emphasis has been placed on processes relating to microbicidal activity. Neutrophils are able to initiate the processes of phagocytosis, degranulation, and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase-dependent killing without new

synthesis of proteins. 1,2 However, Kasprisin and Harris demonstrated that new gene transcription and protein synthesis are required to maintain full capacity for human neutrophil phagocytosis and associated bactericidal activity. 2,3 Despite these early studies, it is mistakenly assumed that mature neutrophils possess limited transcriptional potential-in fact, those isolated from venous blood constitutively express ∼ 12,000 transcripts. 4 Transcriptional processes occurring during granulopoiesis have been investigated intensely. The transcriptional regulation of neutrophil development is mediated, in part, by the coordinated activities of several transcription factors and repressors. For example, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBP α ), PU.1, RAR, CBF, and c-MYB are involved in early granulopoiesis; C/EBP ε , PU.1, SP1, CDP, HOXA10, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)1, STAT3, STAT5, and GFI-1 are involved in terminal neutrophil differentiation. 5,6 The PMN nucleus undergoes progressive chromatin condensation during the postmitotic phase of neutrophil differentiation. In addition, mature cells contain significant quantities of heterochromatin, 7 a property that suggests transcriptional repression. Conversely, early studies of RNA metabolism in mature PMNs demonstrated increased RNA biosynthesis following phagocytosis. 8,9 It is now clear that mature neutrophils express several transcription factors that in turn regulate the transcription of numerous genes involved in a diversity of important cellular processes. Elucidation of mechanisms driving the transcriptional regulation of molecular pathways involved in PMN microbicidal activity, inflammation, and apoptosis are currently areas of intense investigation. Mature neutrophils are exposed to numerous stimuli in the context of the inflammatory milieu. In general, exposure of PMNs to pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interferon (IFN)γ and granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) induces activation of STAT transcription factor members, whereas tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α and interleukin, IL)-1 β induce those of the NF κ B family. NF κ B activation is also promoted by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), platelet-activating factor, N-formyl peptides (e.g., fMLF), leukotriene B4, reactive oxygen species (ROS), phagocytosis, and apoptosis. 6 κ B-binding motifs are present in the promoter regions of several genes encoding inflammatory mediators including IL-1 α β / , TNFα , IL-8, IL-12, CCL4,CCL20,andCXCL1.Inaddition,NF Binhibiκ tion of neutrophil apoptosis in hypoxic environments is further regulated by the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) transcriptional complex. 10 Inasmuch as apoptosis is a complex process, additional transcription factors are likely involved in regulating this critical

<!-- image -->

neutrophil process. For example, the FOXO forkhead subfamily member FOXO3A has recently been shown to directly suppress neutrophil FASL transcription, thereby limiting the FAS-mediated (CD95/APO-1) death receptor pathway of apoptosis. 11 In addition, recent evidence suggests that epigenetic features and chromosomal organization may play a role in the transcriptional regulation of neutrophil development. 12 Although progress has been made, we are only beginning to appreciate the involvement of transcriptional regulation of the complexity of signal transduction networks that govern neutrophil function. Not surprisingly, several recent studies suggest that complex post-transcriptional/translational systems serve as additional checkpoints to regulate neutrophil participation in the innate immune response. For example microRNA-mediated RNA interference 13 and signaldependent translation of constitutive mRNA 14,15 are emerging as critical regulatory elements in neutrophil development and function. Thus, there is no question that neutrophils possess significant capacity for new gene transcription.

## Transcriptome Analyses of Granulocyte Development

Cells of the immune system originate from common hematopoietic progenitor cells in bone marrow. The greatest percentage of hematopoiesis is committed to production of neutrophils, and granulocyte precursors comprise ∼ 60% of the nucleated cells in bone marrow. 7 Human PMN turnover is 50-340 × 10 7 cells/kg/day ( ∼ 0 4-3 . × 10 11 cells/day in a 75-kg person). 16,17 The plasticity of the acute inflammatory response depends, in part, on the ability of the host to regulate neutrophil production based on demand. Thus, regulation and execution of granulopoiesis are highly structured and complex processes. Granulocyte differentiation and development are influenced by the concerted activities of myeloid CSFs such as granulocyte-CSF (G-CSF) and GM-CSF. 18 PMNmaturation occurs in distinct niches within the bone marrow microenvironment prior to migration toward venous sinuses. As myeloid precursors become mature neutrophils, they sequentially acquire features necessary for microbicidal activity including receptors for phagocytosis and signaling, granule components, and NADPH oxidase proteins. PMN maturation is also accompanied by morphological changes (nuclear segmentation) and increased motility and chemotactic responsiveness. This postmitotic maturation time is approximately 6-8 days under basal conditions. 19 Mature PMNs are released into the bloodstream where they circulate with a typical half-life of 6-8 h. 16,17,20,21 Morphological analysis

of circulating neutrophils indicates a low basal level of immature cells, e.g., band cells are ∼ 1-3% of peripheral leukocytes. 20 However, induction of neutrophilia during acute inflammation accelerates the recruitment from bone marrow. Depletion of the stored basal reserves results in a decrease in postmitotic maturation time to 3-4 days 22 and elicits additional release of functionally competent immature forms. 23 Granulopoiesis and PMN egress from bone marrow is enhanced by several immunomodulatory factors including GM-CSF, G-CSF, IL-8, and glucocorticoids. 18,24,25 Although progress has been made, the specific mechanisms for leukocytosis are not completely understood.

Early systematic studies of myelopoiesis focused on transcriptome and proteome analysis using in vitro -differentiated murine cell lines. 26-28 Importantly, these studies provided the fundamental observation that a substantial proportion of neutrophil protein change is a consequence of mRNA transcription and serve as the premise for additional PMN microarray studies. More recently, transcriptome analyses have focused on immature neutrophils isolated from human bone marrow 29-31 or differentiating human leukemic HL60 cells. 32 It is noteworthy that differentiation from commonmyeloid progenitor cells yield lineage-specific gene expression patterns. 29,33 Here, we provide a few examples of systems-level studies on granulopoiesis and also refer the reader to a recent review on the topic. 34 In general, these studies demonstrate that PMNreceptors for numerous inflammatory mediators are up regulated throughout development, suggesting increased functional capacity upon maturation. In addition, the study by Theilgaard-Monch et al. identified 16 previously unknown granule protein candidates including protease inhibitors, proteases, signaling molecules, and acute-phase proteins. 35 These authors also found that there was temporal regulation of transcripts encoding granule proteins, consistent with the 'targeting by timing' hypothesis put forth for proteins of granule subsets. 36 By contrast, gene expression patterns in mature PMNs indicate a decreased capacity for synthesis of granule proteins. 29 Functional studies with these proteins may provide additional insight into neutrophil microbicidal activity in mature cells and the process of granule exocytosis.

## NEUTROPHILS IN THE INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE

## Recruitment and Priming

Following release from bone marrow, neutrophils circulate in the vasculature prior to extravasation,

i.e., movement of cells out of circulation to peripheral tissue. Rapid recruitment of neutrophils to tissues is fundamentally important to the innate immune system. This multistep process involves mobilization of PMNs from bone marrow reserves, accelerated hematopoiesis and recruitment from marginated pools in response to hostand pathogen-derived chemotactic stimuli. PMN migration from the vasculature to the extravascular milieu is dependent on receptor-mediated contact with endothelia of post capillary venules and signals received through soluble mediators. Marginating granulocytes slowly roll along the endothelial surface through interactions of a family of C-type lectin glycoproteins known as selectins. 37 L-selectin is constitutively expressed on the surface of neutrophils and mediates a low-affinity adhesive interaction. Stimulation of endothelial cells leads to the transient expression of both Eand P-selectin. In the presence of inflammatory mediators, adherence rapidly switches to a high-affinity interaction that is mediated by activation of PMN β 2-integrins and endothelial cell intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and ICAM-2. Once firmly bound, several neutrophil surface molecules, including CD31, 38 CD54, 39 CD44, 40 and CD47, 41 facilitate transmigration through the endothelium into tissues.

The ability of neutrophils to localize to sites of infection is a key component of the acute inflammatory response. Neutrophil migration through tissue is influenced by chemoattractants produced by the host during inflammation and pathogen-derived factors. There are numerous host-derived factors that enhance the recruitment of neutrophils. One of the most potent neutrophil chemoattractants is IL-8. 42,43 This chemokine is produced in response to proinflammatory stimuli by a diversity of cell types including mononuclear phagocytes, neutrophils, mast cells, epithelial cells, keratinocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. Neutrophils are also recruited efficiently by leukotrienes and prostaglandins generated exogenously at sites of infection and by the complement component C5a. 44 Many products of bacteria, such as fMLF, peptidoglycan, and phenol-soluble modulins (PSMs), are chemoattractants and contribute directly to PMN recruitment. 45,46 In addition to facilitating neutrophil migration, chemoattractants can also prime PMNs for enhanced function.

Given the high level of cytotoxic molecules produced by PMNs or contained within PMNs, it is perhaps not surprising that these cells are intimately associated with the pathogenesis of tissue injury and trauma associated with inflammatory diseases. 47,48 In order to moderate neutrophil-mediated tissue destruction, PMN activation most appropriately occurs in

regions proximal to the infected tissue. 49 However, the ability of neutrophils to respond rapidly at the infection site is essential to host defense. Thus, it is reasonable to believe that the ability of the neutrophil to reside in a state intermediate to circulating quiescence and complete activation is optimal for plasticity. To that end, neutrophil priming is a reversible process that can enhance cell functions and limit the potential for indiscriminate host tissue damage. 50 The original descriptions of PMN priming indicated that a primary agonist, typically at sub-stimulatory concentration, enhances superoxide production triggered by a second stimulus. 51 Neutrophils can be primed by numerous host factors and processes including cytokines, chemokines, growth-factors, chemotactic factors, leukotrienes, ROS, adherence, and cellular contact. 50 Although priming classically implies augmentation of superoxide-generating potential, several studies have shown that PMN exposure to typical priming agents can also promote adherence, chemotaxis, cytokine secretion, phagocytosis, degranulation, and bactericidal activity (reviewed in 52 ). Many priming agents produced by microorganisms are Toll -like receptor (TLR) agonists and may enable enhanced surveillance and clearance of pathogens from infection sites. The specific molecular mechanisms responsible for priming are unclear, and evidence suggests that multiple pathways converge on the common endpoint of enhanced PMN ROS production. Priming typically includes mobilization of secretory vesicles and some specific granules, and secretion of cytokines, but fails to induce complete degranulation or elicit production of superoxide. 53 Enhanced ROS production in primed PMNs is facilitated by partial assembly of the NADPH oxidase complex. However, neutrophil exposure to different priming agents may result in heterogeneous changes in the structural organization of the oxidase (described below).

## Systems Biology-Level Approaches

## Chemotaxis and Transmigration

Active recruitment of neutrophils to the inflammatory milieu is a sequential process, resulting in the convergence of complex signals that ultimately enhance PMN function. Microarray analysis of PMNs exposed to the potent chemoattractant fMLF revealed a number of up-regulated transcripts encoding pro-inflammatory molecules, such as CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, VEGF, CXCL1, CXCL2, IL1B, IL8 , and TNF . 54 In addition, several genes encoding factors involved in cytoskeletal regulation, adhesion, and motility were up regulated following fMLF stimulation including ICAM1,

<!-- image -->

PLAU, PLAUR, TUBB, TUBB2, TUBB5, ACTG1, LAMB3, CD47 , and TPM4 . Consistent with these findings, analysis of the neutrophil proteome following stimulation through the related formyl peptide receptor-like 1 (FPRL-1) identified several proteins involved in the remodeling of the cytoskeleton. 55 Differentially expressed or modified protein candidates such as the actinand tubulin-interacting proteins, L-plastin, cofilin, moesin, and stathmin were identified by 2-D difference gel electrophoresis (DIGE) analysis. 55 Thus, these in vitro studies demonstrate that selective stimulation of neutrophil formyl peptide receptors induces a limited number of changes that likely enhance both chemotaxis and pro-inflammatory capacity. Two recent studies investigated neutrophil transcriptional changes following migration to aseptic skin lesions 30,34 and LPS-induced alveolar transmigration. 56 Although neutrophil migration to sites of infection is a complex multifaceted process, the neutrophil transcriptomes delineated in these in vivo studies were remarkably similar to those observed in vitro using various PMN priming agents. In general, there were increases in transcripts encoding molecules of neutrophil pathways that regulate pro-inflammatory capacity, adherence, and migration. On the other hand, there was down-regulation of transcripts involved in pathways that promote apoptosis. 30 These findings confirm and extend previous reports that indicate the pro-survival and pro-inflammatory effects of priming agents on neutrophil function.

## Priming with G-CSF and GM-CSF

GM-CSF and G-CSF are multifunctional CSFs that not only participate in myelopoiesis, but emerging evidence suggests that these important molecules enhance the cellular response at the sites of inflammation. Similar to other neutrophil priming agents, both G-CSF and GM-CSF have been shown to delay neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis and this property is consistent with an overall role in promoting the inflammatory response. Microarray studies of the effects of G-CSF on mature human neutrophils demonstrated increased expression of genes encoding plasminogen activator urokinase (PLAU), IL-1 α , granulocyte chemotactic protein-2 (GCP-2), TLR2, and epithelial-cell-derived neutrophil attractant-78 (ENA-78). 57 ENA-78 was subsequently confirmed to enhance chemotaxis of mature neutrophils, thereby providing evidence that G-CSF stimulates mobilization of PMNs to inflammatory sites.

More recently, the effects of GM-CSF on neutrophil gene expression were determined by microarray analysis. 29,58 Martinelli et al. focused on

relative PMN transcription differences following 7 h of in vitro stimulation, whereas Kobayashi et al. performed an extended time course (24 h) of GM-CSF treatment to delineate effects on cell fate. Martinelli et al. noted a comparatively high level of IFNregulated genes in mature PMNs (versus immature cells) that decreased significantly following GM-CSF treatment. Further investigation revealed that type I and type II IFN signal transduction is more efficient in mature PMNs, and they proposed that IFN-signaling potentiates bactericidal activity through formation of neutrophil extracellular traps. Since relatively little is known about the role of IFN-signaling in neutrophil function, additional studies are needed to elucidate this interesting hypothesis. By comparison, Kobayashi et al. found a dramatic increase in transcripts encoding proteins that facilitate host defense or are central to the inflammatory response including CD14, CD32, CD44, CD54, CD66A, CD69, CD74, CD89, CD119, CCR1 (encoding chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 1), CYBB (encoding gp91 phox ), IL1B, IL3RA, IL1R2 , and TLR2 . 58 Although GM-CSF was known to enhance pro-inflammatory capacity, the number of host defense molecules found to be up regulated by this cytokine is remarkable. Two other findings from this study were unexpected and made possible only by the availability of genome-wide approaches. First, transcripts encoding dozens of ribosomes and translation factors were increased 18-24 h after treatment with GM-CSF. This observation is consistent with the idea that human neutrophils have significant biosynthetic capacity. Second, there was an increase in mRNAs encoding major histocompatibility (MHC) class II proteins, which suggests that neutrophils have potential as antigen-presenting cells. 58 Since GM-CSF extends the lifespan of PMNs significantly, the ability of human PMNs to function as antigen-presenting cells could be important in this context.

In the absence of GM-CSF stimulation, the expression of dozens of genes encoding PMN proinflammatory molecules diminished over 24 h in culture and this phenomenon correlated well with induction of spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis. Neutrophil apoptosis was accompanied by significant loss of phagocytic capacity, a finding consistent with down-regulation of receptors 59 and diminished expression of transcripts encoding CD11b, CD16, CD18, CD32, CD35, and CD64. 58 In addition, downregulation of genes encoding anti-apoptosis proteins, such as myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1 (MCL1), caspase 8 and FAS-associated via death domainlike apoptosis regulator (CFLAR), B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma 2 (BCL2/adenovirus

E1B 19 kDa-interacting protein 2 (BNIP2), and serum/glucocorticoid-regulated kinase (SGK) coincided with spontaneous apoptosis. In stark contrast, GM-CSF treatment delayed neutrophil apoptosis and prevented down-regulation of transcripts encoding pro-inflammatory factors. 58 These findings provided a comprehensive view of the processes that regulate neutrophil survival and apoptosis.

## Priming with LPS

Studies on the immunomodulatory effects of bacterial endotoxin are of historical importance for description of neutrophil function in general. In 1960, Cohn and Morse reported that LPS treatment enhanced neutrophil bactericidal activity. 60 In the early 1980s, Dahinden et al. demonstrated the ability of LPS to alter PMN adhesion, respiratory burst, degranulation, and motility. 61 These studies were followed by evidence that LPS is a potent neutrophil priming agent. 51 The discovery that a TLR4/MD2/CD14 complex recognized LPS facilitated further investigation into the pathways governing effects on neutrophil function. 62 Since then, several investigators have used transcriptome and proteome analyses to elucidate further the neutrophil LPS-mediated signal transduction pathways. 54,63-68 Although there were variations in both microarray platforms used and LPS dose levels, there was a general concordance of gene expression patterns that support increased pro-inflammatory capacity of LPS-stimulated neutrophils. For example, Rel/NF κ B family members, NFKB1, NFKB2 , and RELA , were up regulated in response to LPS treatment. In addition, transcripts encoding IL-1 β , IL-6, MIP-1 β , MIP-3 α , MCP-1, GRO3, IL-10RA, TNFα , and HM74 were up regulated. Initial experiments on LPS-stimulated PMNs performed by Worthen and colleagues revealed a surprising increase in the expression of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), such as ISG15, MX1, IFI56, IFIT4, IFI54, IFI58 , and IFP35 . 66 A followup study by the same laboratory investigated the mechanisms for induction of ISGs in LPS-stimulated neutrophils. 68 In contrast to monocytes, neutrophil expression levels of IFNA and IFNB remained unchanged and phosphorylation of STAT proteins was not detected. These authors concluded that neutrophil ISG expression following LPS-stimulation proceeds in an IFN-independent fashion. By contrast, a recent study by Tamassia et al. did not detect LPS-mediated induction of ISGs, although expression IFNB was similarly absent in PMNs and present in monocytes. 67 The reason for the discrepancy between studies is unclear. However, the divergence in TLR4 signaling pathways between neutrophils and monocytes is intriguing and warrants further investigation.

## Neutrophil Phagocytosis and Activation

Neutrophils bind and ingest invading microorganisms at sites of infection through a process known as phagocytosis (Figure 2). Bacteria contain a diversity of evolutionarily conserved structures that facilitate direct recognition by neutrophils. Molecules such as LPS, lipoprotein, lipoteichoic acid (LTA), and flagellin comprise pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that interact with receptors on the surface of neutrophil membranes. Neutrophils express TLRs 1, 2, 4-10, and additional receptors such as the peptidoglycan recognition protein. 69 In general, ligation of the neutrophil pattern recognition receptors activates signal transduction pathways that ultimately prolong cell survival, 70 facilitate adhesion 70 and phagocytosis, 69 enhance release of cytokines, chemokines and ROS, 69-71 and promote degranulation, 72,73 thereby contributing to innate host defense. PMN phagocytosis is efficiently promoted by opsonization of microbes with host proteins such as antibody and complement. Specific antibody recognizes epitopes on microbial surfaces and promotes the deposition of complement components through the classic pathway of complement activation. Antibodies bound to the surface of microbes are recognized by neutrophil receptors specific for the Fc-region of antibody, including CD64 (Fc γ RI, IgG receptor), CD32 (Fc γ RIIa, low-affinity IgG receptor), 74,75 CD16 (Fc γ RIIIb, low-affinity IgG receptor), 74,76 CD89 (Fc α R, IgA receptor), 77 and CD23 (Fc ε RI, IgE receptor). 78 Microbes opsonized with complement are efficiently recognized by PMN surface receptors, such as ClqR, 79 CD35 (CR1), 80,81 CD11b/CD18 (CR3) 82,83 and CD11c/CD18 (CR4). 84 Ligation of these membrane-bound opsonin receptors initiates changes in the cytoskeleton that execute the physical process of phagocytosis. Polymerization of PMN actin microfilaments proximal to receptor ligation facilitates plasma membrane flow around the microbial surface until completion of the engulfment process. Ingested microbes are thus sequestered within membranebound vacuoles known as phagosomes (Figure 2).

PMNphagocytosis initiates sequential execution of the battery of neutrophil microbicidal mechanisms. Neutrophil antimicrobial activity is generated from two primary sources: 1) production of superoxide radicals and other secondarily derived ROS and 2) granules containing antimicrobial peptides, proteins, and degradative enzymes (Figure 2). Neutrophil activation triggers an abrupt increase in oxygen consumption, a process classically termed the respiratory burst. The generation of ROS is mediated by a multicomponent membrane-bound complex, NADPH-dependent oxidase (reviewed in

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

(b)

FIGURE 2 | Neutrophil phagocytosis and microbicidal process. Panel (a) illustrates binding and phagocytosis of a microbe opsonized with antibody or serum complement. Phagocytosis triggers production of superoxide (O ·-2 ) from which other secondarily derived ROS are formed, including hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2) and hypochlorous acid (HOCl). Panel (b) is a transmission electron micrograph of a human neutrophil that has phagocytosed numerous Staphylococcus aureus (Microbe).

<!-- image -->

ref. 85). In unactivated neutrophils, components of the NADPH-oxidase are compartmentalized to either the cytosol (p40 phox , p47 phox , p67 phox , and the GTPase Rac2) or membranes (flavocytochrome b 558, comprised of gp91 phox and p22 phox ). The majority of flavocytochrome b 558 resides in the membranes of specific granules, gelatinase granules, and secretory vesicles, whereas the remainder is found in the plasma membrane. PMN priming stimuli induce varied

degrees of intermediate structural changes within the NADPH oxidase complex. In general, the majority of neutrophil priming agents, including LPS, 53 IL-8, 86 GM-CSF, 87 and TNFα , 88 induce a modest increase in phosphorylation of p47 phox . However, translocation of p47 phox and both phosphorylation and translocation of additional cytosolic oxidase components are priming stimulus-dependent. PMN priming with LPS results in partial redistribution of flavocytochrome b 558 from the specific granules to the plasma membrane. 53 The assembly of NADPH- oxidase is accomplished by translocation of the cytosolic components to the plasma or phagosome membrane and association with flavocytochrome b 558. The oxidase mediates electron transfer from cytosolic NADPH to intraphagosomal molecular oxygen, thereby forming superoxide anion. Superoxide anion is short-lived and dismutates rapidly to hydrogen peroxide and promotes formation of other secondary reactive products, such as hypochlorous acid, hydroxyl radical, and singlet oxygen, which are effective microbicidal compounds. 89-92

Concomitant with assembly of the NADPH oxidase, neutrophil phagocytosis triggers degranulation, which involves fusion of cytoplasmic granules with the plasma and/or phagosome membrane. Peroxidase negative granules, i.e., secretory vesicles, gelatinase granules, and specific granules, serve as a reservoir of functionally important membrane proteins such as CR3, formyl peptide receptor, flavocytochrome b 558, and β 2-integrins. Fusion of primary/azurophilic granules (peroxidase-positive granules) with phagosomes enriches the vacuole lumen with antimicrobial agents including α -defensins, cathepsins, proteinase3, elastase, azurocidin, lysozyme, and bactericidalpermeability-increasing protein. The cumulative antimicrobial activity of neutrophils is thus comprised of ROS and a broad range of antimicrobial peptides and enzymes. Inasmuch as many of these agents do not discriminate between host and microbe, and neutrophils also contain enzymes that degrade host tissues (e.g., elastase, gelatinase, and collagenase), a mechanism must exist to limit damage to host cells and tissues during and after the inflammatory response.

## Transcriptome Analyses of Neutrophil Phagocytosis

Although ingestion of microbes is mediated by interactions with neutrophil Fc and complement receptors, the microbial surface contains a diversity of structures that are both phylogenetically conserved and species-specific. Pathogens are also capable of secreting putative virulence factors that interact with human cells, including those of the innate immune

system. Thus, PMN response to bacterial pathogens involves complex signals induced by ligation of multiple receptors in addition to those participating in Fc- and complement-mediated phagocytosis.

Several studies have used microarray analysis to gain insight into molecular determinants that mediate events accompanying PMN phagocytosis and these findings have been reviewed previously. 93 Early transcriptome studies demonstrated that the process of PMN phagocytosis per se induces numerous transcriptional changes that are consistent with increased production of pro-inflammatory mediators not unlike that observed following priming. 94,95 For example, PMNs up regulate transcripts early that encode important inflammatory mediators, such as CCL3, CCL4, CCL20, oncostatin M, CXCL2, CXCL3, VEGF, IL-6, and TNFα , following Fc- and complement receptor-mediated phagocytosis. However, it is also evident that binding and ingestion of microorganisms results in a complex series of neutrophil signal transduction events including TLR activation and the production of additional inflammatory mediators that are potentially pathogen-specific. Genome-wide PMN transcription analyses have been performed following phagocytosis of several microorganisms including Escherichia coli K12, 54,94 attenuated Yersinia pestis KIM5 and KIM6, 94,94 Staphylococcus aureus , 96,97 Streptococcus pyogenes , 96 Burkholderia cepacia , 96 Listeria monocytogenes , 96 Borrelia hermsii , 96 Mycobacterium bovis , 98 Candida albicans , 99,100 and Anaplasma phagocytophilum . 97,101-103 Inasmuch as differences in pathogen-induced PMN transcript levels occur in signal transduction mediators and prominent transcription factors, it is not surprising that the PMN response is not entirely conserved. Thus, identification of pathogen-specific PMN transcriptional profiles is a sound approach toward elucidation of mechanisms of bacterial and fungal pathogenesis. Although detailed dissection of pathogen-specific PMN profiles is beyond the scope of this review, specific examples are provided below.

## Proteome Analysis of Neutrophil Phagosomes

Comparedwithtranscriptome-basedstudies of PMNs, there are a limited number of neutrophil proteome studies. Burlak et al. used high-resolution subcellular proteomics to generate a comprehensive view of proteins associated with human neutrophil phagosomes. 104 Many of the proteins found to be associated with neutrophil phagosomes are also known to be associated with phagosomes of macrophages. 105 These include proteins comprising the actin-based cytoskeleton or those involved in cell

motility, such as actin, α -actinin, subunits of the actinrelated protein 2/3 complex, myosin, tropomyosin, and vimentin. Somewhat unexpectedly, proteins typically found in the endoplasmic reticulum, including calnexin, ERp29, GRP58/ERp57, GRP78/Ig-heavy chain-binding protein (BIP) and protein disulfide isomerase, were associated with neutrophil phagosomes. Previous studies by Garin et al. and Gagnon et al. were the first to demonstrate that molecular chaperones are associated with phagosomes of macrophages and proposed that the endoplasmic reticulum contributes to phagocytosis. 105,106 The role of endoplasmic reticulum in macrophage phagocytosis was recently a topic of intense debate, 107-109 and the precise function of these phagosomal chaperones remains to be determined. However, recent work by several laboratories indicates that antigens processed within phagosomes undergo cross presentation by MHC class I molecules. 106,110-112 On the basis of these studies, it was proposed that protein processing and quality control machinery, which include molecular chaperones and proteasome subunits, function within phagosomes to promote antigen presentation. 110 Inasmuch as we identified 11 molecular chaperones and 5 proteasome subunits associated with human neutrophil phagosomes, 104 the function of these molecules on phagosomes is perhaps conserved between macrophages and neutrophils. Another unexpected finding from the proteomics analysis by Burlak et al. was that proteins typically found in the mitochondria, including F1 ATPase, prohibitin, and peroxiredoxin 3, were also associated with phagosomes. 104 Although the function of these proteins at neutrophil phagosomes is unknown, the results of these systems biology-level studies suggest that human PMNs have functions beyond killing of microorganisms, including potential for antigen processing.

## Proteins of Neutrophil Granules

To better understand the mechanisms of granule exocytosis, Lominadze et al. performed a comprehensive analysis of proteins comprising human neutrophil granule subsets. 113 These studies identified 286 proteins in gelatinase, specific and azurophil granules, and provided the first comprehensive view of proteins associated with these important neutrophil organelles. Subsequent work by Jethwaney et al. reported the proteomes of human neutrophil plasma membranes and secretory vesicles. 114 Each study identified proteins not previously known to be associated with the secretory vesicles (e.g., 5-lipoxygenase-activating protein and dysferlin) or neutrophil granules (e.g., calreticulin). 113,114 Taken together, the data are an

<!-- image -->

important step toward developing a systems biologylevel understanding of neutrophil function.

## NEUTROPHIL APOPTOSIS

Apoptosis is an important mechanism for regulating homeostasis in cells of the immune system. Normal turnover of aging neutrophils occurs in the absence of activation through a process known as spontaneous apoptosis. 115 The intrinsic ability of aged neutrophils to undergo apoptosis is essential for maintaining appropriate cell numbers in circulation. 116 In addition, neutrophil apoptosis plays a central role in resolution of the acute inflammatory response. The indiscriminate release of highly toxic microbicidal components as a consequence of PMN lysis can lead to host tissue damage, which is exacerbated by prolonged inflammation. The association between prolonged neutrophil survival and clinically apparent inflammatory disorders is well documented. 47,48 Apoptotic PMNs are recognized and cleared by macrophages, thereby preventing excessive host tissue damage by limiting inflammation at sites of infection. 117 Notwithstanding, the inflammatory milieu is a complex mixture of microbe- and host-derived factors and PMN apoptosis is not an immutable process. Determination of neutrophil fate in such a confounded environment requires simultaneous deciphering of both pro- and anti-apoptotic signals. Furthermore, stimuli that are potent inducers of apoptosis in other cell types can have the opposite effect on neutrophils. For example, exposure of neutrophils to corticosteroids, 118 hypoxic environments, 119 TNFα , 120 and conditions that elevate intracellular Ca 2 + 121 and ATP levels 122 inhibit rather than promote neutrophil apoptosis. Nevertheless, it is increasingly clear that the extension of neutrophil survival promotes enhanced clearance of invading microbial pathogens, whereas induction of PMN apoptosis facilitates cell turnover and resolution of inflammation.

## Constitutive (Spontaneous) Neutrophil Apoptosis

PMNsenescence induces characteristic morphological and physiological changes including cell shrinkage, nuclear condensation, vacuolated cytoplasm, DNA fragmentation, and mitochondrial depolarization 123 (Figure 3). In addition, neutrophil apoptosis is associated with an overall diminished functional capacity including impaired chemotaxis, phagocytosis, respiratory burst, and degranulation. 58,59 The overall decrease in neutrophil function is likely a result of down-regulation or shedding of neutrophil surface

receptors. 124-126 Apoptotic neutrophils also expose phosphatidylserine on the cell surface, which triggers specific recognition and removal by macrophages. 127 Similar to other cells of the immune system, neutrophils are susceptible to both intrinsic and extrinsic pathways of apoptosis. The intrinsic 'stress-induced' pathway of apoptosis is accompanied by reduction in mitochondrial membrane potential, release of cytochrome c and activation of caspase 9. The extrinsic pathways of apoptosis are triggered by engagement of death receptors of the TNF family, which leads to the activation of caspase 8. The majority of studies demonstrate that spontaneous PMN apoptosis occurs primarily through intrinsic pathways and there is little evidence that death receptors participate in this process. Although the mechanisms for initiation of PMN constitutive apoptosis are unknown, it is well accepted that neutrophil apoptosis is a highly complex process and reports of PMN-specific variations in conventional pathways are common.

Mitochondria are a central component to intrinsic apoptosis pathways. However, neutrophil mitochondria are somewhat of an enigma. Neutrophil processes such as chemotaxis consume large quantities of ATP, which are almost exclusively generated through glycolysis. 128 Oxidative phosphorylation is virtually absent in human PMNs. 129 Early ultrastructural studies of neutrophil mitochondria reveal these organelles to be few in number and small in size. 7 However, more recent neutrophil imaging studies using fluorescent probes to measure transmembrane potential indicate PMNs contain a complex tubular network of mitochondria. 130,131 Mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization is an early event in the intrinsic apoptosis pathway and is facilitated by the activation of the pro-apoptotic BCL2-associated X (BAX) protein. 131,132 During apoptosis, mitochondria release additional pro-apoptotic factors into the cytoplasm, such as cytochrome c, Smac/DIABLO, 133 Omi/HtrA2, 133 EndoG, 134 and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF). 134 Cytosolic cytochrome c, although significantly reduced in neutrophils, 135 interacts with apoptotic protease-activating factor 1 (APAF-1) in the presence of dATP to trigger formation of a complex called the apoptosome. 136 The apoptosome recruits, binds, and activates the apoptosis initiator caspase-9. Caspase activation is additionally controlled by the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP), 133 which is rapidly recruited to the apoptosome complex. Displacement of XIAP by Smac/DIABLO potentiates caspase activation, including the apoptosis executioner caspase-3.

Activation of the apoptosis initiator caspase-8 is involved in neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis.

FIGURE 3 | Neutrophil apoptosis. Human neutrophils were isolated from venous blood and then processed for transmission electron microscopy or stained with Wright-Giemsa (inset) after purification (0 h) or 24 h in culture.

<!-- image -->

Although activation of caspase-8 is commonly associated with apoptosis induced by ligation of death receptors, caspase-8 is peculiarly activated at times early (prior to caspase-3) in neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis. 137-139 Ligation of death receptors, such as TNFα receptor, 120 FAS, 140 and TRAIL receptor, 141 initiates the formation of a death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) and subsequent activation of caspase8. However, caspase-8 activation during neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis occurs independently of death receptor ligation, which suggests the presence of an alternative activation pathway. Two distinct mechanisms have been proposed to account for the activation of caspase-8 during neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis. The first mechanism involves acid sphingomyelinaseinduced clustering of death receptors in lipid rafts, spontaneous DISC assembly and subsequent activation of caspase-8. 142 The second mechanism provides for the direct activation of caspase-8 by the neutrophil aspartic acid protease cathepsin D that is released from azurophilic granules. 143 Provocatively, ROS are important for both death receptor clustering and permeabilization of azurophilic granules during neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis. However, the mechanism for ROS production in non-activated neutrophils is unclear. ROS are clearly important for activation of caspase-8 during phagocytosis-induced neutrophil programmed cell death. 144 Caspase-8 is also involved in cleavage of the BCL-2 family protein BID that participates in mitochondrial membrane permeabilization by a mechanism similar to BAX. 145 The activity of caspases can also be impaired through direct modifications such as phosphorylation of caspase-8 and caspase-3 by p38-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). 146 There are numerous additional pro- and anti-apoptotic factors that have been implicated in spontaneous apoptosis of neutrophils. 147 The existence of multiple pathways governing neutrophil cell fate highlights the importance of apoptosis as a regulatory rheostat between homeostasis and host defense. However, determination of the hierarchy for execution of distinct pathways in neutrophil apoptosis

remains to be elucidated. Given the complexity of apoptosis pathways, studies of neutrophil apoptosis are ideally suited to interrogation by genome-wide approaches, as comprehensive understanding of these mechanisms using traditional single molecule studies would be time-consuming.

## Extracellular Factors

The ability of neutrophils to receive and respond to environmental signals is prerequisite for participation in host defense. Microbial infections are accompanied by important host responses, including release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which alter neutrophil apoptosis. In general, the majority of inflammatory mediators are associated with delaying neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis and include factors, such as IL-1 β , 148 IL-6, 149 IL-8, 150 GRO- , 151 α plateletactivating factor, 120 IFNγ , 152 G-CSF, 148 C5a, 153 and GM-CSF. 148 Notably, most of the host-derived cytokines that delay apoptosis are also neutrophil priming agents. However, reports on the effects of the potent PMN priming agent TNFα on neutrophil survival are more variable. TNFα has both pro- and anti-apoptotic effects on neutrophils. The divergent effects of TNFα on neutrophil survival are related to concentration, 154 duration of stimulus, 120 and functional state of the cell. 155 High concentrations of TNFα induce neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis associated with increased levels of ROS, whereas prolonged survival correlates with activation of NF B. 156 κ The in vivo relevance of this phenomenon is unclear. In addition to effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines on PMN fate, prolonged neutrophil survival is enhanced by neutrophil adhesion to ligands of β 2-integrin. 157 Ligation of CD11b with soluble fibrinogen delays neutrophil apoptosis and triggers NF B κ activation through an extracellular signalregulated kinase (ERK)1/2-dependent pathway. 158 Antibody cross-linking of β 2 -integrin induces the activation of survival pathways through Akt and MAPK-ERK. 157 However, subsequent stimulation

<!-- image -->

with TNFα leads to decreased Akt activity through SH2-domain-containing inositol phosphatase (SHIP) activation and results in a rapid progression of neutrophil apoptosis. 159

Bacterial-derived products such as LPS, LTA, and some secreted toxins are known to delay neutrophil apoptosis. 147 Inasmuch as several TLR ligands are potent PMN priming agents, it follows that TLR-mediated signal transduction pathways influence neutrophil fate. However, the majority of evidence suggests that only TLR4 and TLR2 directly modulate PMN survival. Stimulation of neutrophils with either purified LPS (TLR4) 70 or LTA (TLR2) 73 delays spontaneous apoptosis. Inhibition of NF B κ activation is associated with enhanced TLR4-mediated neutrophil survival. 70 Studies on TLR-inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis in whole blood indicate that phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activation may also be involved in an enhanced survival. 160 The addition of monocytes to TLR4stimulated PMNs also prolongs neutrophil survival, 70 suggesting a possible synergy with cytokine-signaling pathways. Mononuclear cell-dependent enhancement of neutrophil survival has also been demonstrated following exposure to staphylococcal enterotoxins. 161 Several other bacterial molecules have been shown to directly promote neutrophil survival, such as E. coli verotoxin, 162 Shiga toxin, 163 and Sta. epidermidis PSMs. 164 Together, these observations suggest that enhanced neutrophil survival is a desirable consequence during early stages of inflammation and promotes the clearance of bacterial pathogens.

## Influence of Bacteria on PMN Survival

The ability of inflammatory mediators and bacterialderived products to support neutrophil survival preceding phagocytosis is important for maintenance of optimal microbicidal potential. In contrast, phagocytosis-induced cell death (PICD) is a mechanism to clear tissues of effete neutrophils containing killed microbes, thereby facilitating the resolution of infection. As with spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis, timely removal of neutrophils-although in this case after phagocytosis-would prevent release of cytotoxic molecules into surrounding host tissues, a phenomenon caused by necrotic lysis. The process of phagocytosis significantly accelerates the rate of apoptosis in human PMNs. 96,144,165-167 Consistent with this idea, neutrophil ingestion of E. coli, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Str. pneumoniae, Str. pyogenes, C. albicans, Sta. aureus, M. tuberculosis, Bur. cepacia, Bor. hermsii , and L. monocytogenes significantly accelerates the rate of PMN apoptosis. 147 Importantly, phagocytosis significantly increases the rate of PMN apoptosis

irrespective of any delay in cell fate imparted by cytokines or bacteria-derived factors. 124,167,168 Thus, PMN apoptosis plays a central role not only in regulation of cell turnover, but also in termination of the inflammatory process.

Although, PICD is desirable for the resolution of infection and prevention of prolonged inflammation, this process is not immutable. The relatively short lifespan of neutrophils is not amenable to the long-term survival strategies employed by most intracellular pathogens; however, several bacterial pathogens are capable of exploiting apoptosis/PICD as a potential mechanism of pathogenesis. To that end, these microorganisms either accelerate or delay neutrophil apoptosis. Two bacterial pathogens have been shown conclusively to delay human neutrophil apoptosis. A. phagocytophilum , the causative agent of human granulocytic anaplasmosis, was the first bacterial pathogen reported to delay PMN apoptosis, which ultimately promotes replication within an endosomal compartment. 169 More recently, Chlamydia pneumoniae was shown to delay neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis 170 to facilitate intracellular replication. Conversely, bacterial pathogens such as Sta. aureus and Str. pyogenes cause direct PMN lysis and/or accelerate bacteria-induced apoptosis to the point of secondary necrosis. 96,171,172 The deleterious effects on neutrophil cell fate may be mediated in part by bacterial toxins. For example, some staphylococci produce leukotoxins that promote apoptosis at sublytic levels 173 or profoundly affect neutrophil integrity. 171 In addition, Pseudomonas aeruginosa pyocyanin 174 and Aspergillus fumigatus gliotoxin 175 have been shown to promote neutrophil apoptosis. It is likely that accelerated PMN lysis contributes to the overall levels of tissue necrosis associated with these infections.

## Neutrophil Apoptosis Differentiation Program

The importance of neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis in maintenance of cellular homeostasis is well recognized and considerable effort has been expended toward determining the molecular mechanisms governing this essential process. In addition, we now know that neutrophil activation has a direct impact on apoptosis and regulation of PICD differs from that of spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis. Reports of additional factors and conditions that modulate neutrophil fate have increased steadily over the past decade, but we are still far from a complete understanding of the specific pathways that regulate neutrophil apoptosis. That said, systems biology-level approaches have

been instrumental in reshaping our view of the role of neutrophils in the resolution of the inflammatory response. Notably, genome-wide studies have been a crucial guide in our investigation of the molecular determinants that regulate neutrophil PICD and have provided new insight into mechanisms by which bacteria exploit this important process.

Within a few hours after neutrophil phagocytosis, the number of differentially expressed apoptosisrelated genes increases dramatically. For example, genes encoding apoptosis mediators, such as BAX, BCL2A1, CFLAR , and nuclear orphan receptors TR3 ( NR4A1 ), NURR1 ( NR4A2 ), and NOR1 ( NR4A3 ), are up regulated prior to initiation of PICD. 95 In addition, phagocytosis of bacterial pathogens up regulates PMN transcripts encoding several key mediators of TNF- and TLR2-signaling, including TNF, IRAK1 , and TNFAIP8 . 96 Several lines of evidence indicate that pro-inflammatory capacity of human PMNs is regulated at the level of gene expression during PICD. For instance, the initial stages of PMN apoptosis are accompanied by changes in the expression of genes encoding important regulators of detoxification and redox pathways, such as those governing glutathione, thioredoxin, and heme metabolism. 176 Thus, transcriptional regulation of PMN detoxification pathways provides a secondary mechanism to limit inflammatory potential should neutrophils undergo premature lysis. Importantly, progression of neutrophil apoptosis correlates with down-regulation of genes encoding pro-inflammatory mediators, phosphoinositide metabolism, and calcium signal transduction. 126,176 Although it is appreciated that neutrophil apoptosis is characterized by an overall decrease in functional capacity, the sheer number of transcripts identified by genome-wide analyses as down regulated during PICD was somewhat unexpected. 95,96,126 For example, dozens of transcripts encoding key pro-inflammatory mediators and signal transduction molecules were down regulated during the initiation of phagocytosis-induced apoptosis. 95,96,126,176 Among these, 42 genes encoded proteins critical to the inflammatory response, including receptors for IL-8 β , IL-10 α , IL-13 α 1, IL-15 α , IL17, IL-18, C1q, formyl peptide, and CD31, CD32, and TLR6. In addition, the vast majority of genes encoding pro-inflammatory molecules that were up regulated at times early following phagocytosis decreased significantly following induction of PICD. On the basis of these findings and the integration of functional studies using human neutrophils, we proposed that bacteria induce an apoptosis differentiation program in human neutrophils that facilitates PMN turnover

FIGURE 4 | Neutrophil apoptosis differentiation program. Post-phagocytosis sequelae identified using microarray-based approaches followed by in vitro assays with human neutrophils. The neutrophil apoptosis differentiation program represents a final stage of transcriptionally regulated PMN maturation that is accelerated by phagocytosis.

<!-- image -->

and resolution of the inflammatory response 93 (Figure 4). Thus, accelerated neutrophil apoptosis after phagocytosis and the accompanying down-regulation of inflammatory capacity is a desired consequence that contributes to the resolution of infection. Consistent with this hypothesis, PMN phagocytosis of Bor. hermsii, Bur. cepacia, L. monocytogenes, Sta. aureus , and Str. pyogenes elicits similar patterns of gene expression that collectively form a common transcriptome (apoptosis differentiation program). 96 The neutrophil apoptosis differentiation program includes molecules involved in multiple biological processes, culminating with down-regulation of pro-inflammatory capacity and concomitant induction of apoptosis/PICD (Figure 4).

Inasmuch as neutrophil apoptosis is a critical process for resolution of inflammation, it is not surprising that some bacterial pathogens alter the normal PMN apoptosis differentiation program as a mechanism of pathogenesis. For instance, the ability of Str. pyogenes to cause rapid PICD and ultimately PMN lysis is reflected by and/or results from the changes in neutrophil gene expression. 96 Ingestion of Str. pyogenes elicits unique transcriptional variations in cell death pathways that include up-regulation of activator protein-1 (AP-1) complex-related transcripts, such as FOS, FOSL1, FOSB, JUNB , and

<!-- image -->

TNFRSF5 , and down-regulation of transcripts encoding members of the NF- B κ signal transduction pathway. 96 These findings indicate that the ability of Str. pyogenes to exploit PMN fate pathways is likely an important component of streptococcal pathogenesis and is a potential contributor to fulminant tissue destruction observed in invasive disease. 177 It is important to note that the ability of Str. pyogenes to induce comparatively more rapid PICD and neutrophil lysis was discovered with a transcriptome approach, as those results directed the subsequent in vitro studies. In stark contrast, the obligate intracellular pathogen A. phagocytophilum inhibits neutrophil apoptosis to survive and thereby cause disease. To investigate the molecular basis of A. phagocytophilum survival within neutrophils, Borjesson et al. used oligonucleotide microarrays to measure global changes in human PMN gene expression following infection with A. phagocytophilum . 97 Functional analysis of infected PMNs confirmed previous reports that A. phagocytophilum fails to trigger neutrophil production of ROS 178,179 and the pathogen delays PMN spontaneous apoptosis. 169 In addition, PMN uptake of A. phagocytophilum occurs at a slow rate compared with that observed with other bacteria. 97 Consistent with the functional studies, infection of human PMNs with A. phagocytophilum delayed up-regulation of transcripts involved in the acute inflammatory response, such as TNF, IL1B, CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, CCL3, CCL4 , and CD54 . 97 Similar gene expression profiles from A. phagocytophilum -infected neutrophils were reported in subsequent studies. 101-103 One key finding of these studies related to the levels of PMN transcripts encoding NADPH-oxidase proteins. Previous studies using promyelocytic HL60 cells, an immortalized cell line sometimes used as a model for human neutrophils, had suggested that the ability of A. phagocytophilum to inhibit ROS production was due to a down-regulation of transcripts encoding NADPH oxidase proteins. 180,181 In contrast, microarray studies using human neutrophils indicated that these transcripts remained unchanged or increased in expression following ingestion of A. phagocytophilum . 97 This finding resolved controversy in part about the mechanism underlying inhibition of ROS in A. phagocytophilum -infected neutrophils. In addition, A. phagocytophilum -infected PMNs increased expression levels of several antiapoptosis genes including BIRC2, BIRC3, CFLAR, TNFAIP8, and TNIP2 , and decreased expression of numerous AIFs. Moreover, interaction of live or dead A. phagocytophilum with PMNs results in the inability to induce neutrophil apoptosis via ligation

of the FAS death receptor, 97 and indicate that preexisting surface molecules facilitate survival during A. phagocytophilum infection, presumably to promote bacterial replication and persistence.

The ability of pathogens to alter neutrophil fate by either blocking apoptosis to facilitate intracellular pathogen survival or promoting rapid lysis to eliminate neutrophils represents plausible mechanisms of virulence. The genome-wide analyses with human neutrophils and bacteria, coupled with the results of many targeted studies using neutrophils and animal models, led to the hypothesis that there are two fundamental outcomes of PMN-bacteria interactions (Figure 5). On one hand, phagocytosis activates neutrophils and ingested microorganisms are killed, thus leading to PICD and removal of effete PMNs by macrophages. This process leads to the resolution of infection and is healthy for the host. Alternatively, pathogens are ingested but not killed, and neutrophils either lyse or have delayed turnover that promotes pathogen replication (Figure 5). Either of these latter outcomes is counterproductive for the resolution of infection and potentially results in disease. Although systems biology-level approaches have been critical to enhancing our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of neutrophil PICD and bacterial pathogenesis, the complex association of neutrophils, macrophages, and secreted pathogen and host factors at infection sites complicate this rather simplistic model. Furthermore, it has been suggested recently that bacterial pathogens alter the process of efferocytosis by influencing secretion of TNFα from macrophages, 182 which may in turn impact the resolution of inflammation. 183,184 The development of complex in vitro and in vivo model systems, combined with genome-wide approaches, will be the next important step toward a complete understanding of the role of neutrophil apoptosis in bacterial pathogenesis.

## DISEASE PROCESSES

Neutropenia and inherent deficiencies in neutrophil function are important predisposing risk factors for development of life-threatening bacterial and fungal infections. The majority of congenital neutrophil disorders are relatively rare, thereby confounding characterization of disease. Genome-wide expression analyses have provided new insight into the pathophysiology of disease or served as an important first step toward identifying the molecular genetic basis of disease.

FIGURE 5 | A schematic that illustrates two fundamental outcomes of microbe-neutrophil interaction. See text for details.

<!-- image -->

## Chronic Granulomatous Disease

Leukocytes from patients with X-linked chronic granulomatous disease (XCGD) are defective in their ability to produce ROS due to defined heterogeneous mutations that preclude assembly of the NADPH oxidase. 185-189 Although the genetic and cellular basis of XCGD has long been known (reviewed in Ref. 190), the molecular basis of associated pathophysiologies, such as formation of granulomas, remains undetermined. Recently, we used gene expression profiling to obtain a comprehensive global view of the impact of PMN-derived oxidants on the resolution of inflammation. 191 Analysis of PMNs from XCGD patients revealed that these cells had increased levels of transcripts encoding pro-inflammatory molecules and decreased expression of genes encoding anti-inflammation mediators, consistent with a previous report showing excessive IL-8 production by CGD neutrophils. 192 In addition, neutrophil transcripts involved in PICD are differentially expressed between activated PMNs from healthy control subjects and XCGD patients and coincide with a delay in apoptosis. Taken together, these findings provide support to the hypothesis that reduced or absent PICD in XCGD neutrophils results in delayed resolution of inflammation, which could contribute to the formation of granulomas in XCGD patients.

## Specific Granule Deficiency

Neutrophil-specific granule deficiency (SGD) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by susceptibility to recurrent pyogenic infections. Neutrophils from SGD patients have impaired bactericidal activity due to deficiencies in specific granule contents, in addition to selective absence of azurophilic and tertiary granule constituents. The molecular basis of SGD was recently shown to involve germ-line mutations in the transcription factor, C/EBP ε 193 Preceding characterization of

the human defect, a mice deficient in C/EBP ε demonstrated a defined role in hematopoiesis, 194 and mature neutrophils are severely functionally impaired. 195 Recently, gene expression profiling was used to provide additional insight into the pathophysiology of SGD in a mouse model of disease. 196 This study demonstrated myeloid cell transcriptional changes in genes corresponding to a broad range of cellular processes. Dysregulation of gene expression was appropriately observed in key inflammatory response regulators, such as CCL2, CCL4, CCL7, IL6, IL1B, CCR1, IL8RB , and CSF3R . In addition, there was dysregulation of genes encoding cytoskeletal structural and regulatory proteins, potentially explaining neutrophil defects in chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and superoxide production. Further investigation into the role of C/EBP ε in regulating the transcription of genes identified in those studies will likely provide additional insight into the pathophysiology of SGD.

## Hyper-IgE Syndrome (HIES)/Job's Syndrome

Hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES) or Job's syndrome is a rare immunological disorder characterized by dermatitis, recurrent staphylococcal skin abscesses, cystforming pneumonias, elevated serum IgE levels, and multiple developmental abnormalities. Although HIES was originally described by Davis et al. in 1966, 197 the molecular genetic basis of the disease was identified only recently. 4,198 As a first step toward identifying the cause of HIES and to gain insight into the molecular processes that contribute to the pathophysiology of the disease, Holland et al. compared global gene expression in leukocytes from HIES patients and healthy control individuals. 4 Transcriptome analysis of unstimulated and stimulated PMNs from HIES patients revealed that there were elevated levels of transcripts encoding pro-inflammatory molecules in

<!-- image -->

patient cells, including at least 30 transcripts encoding proteins related to IFN signal transduction (Figure 6). Collectively, the PMN transcriptome data suggested that signal transduction involving IFNs and STATs was altered in HIES patients (Figure 6). Consistent with those results, HIES leukocytes had increased production of IFNγ and TNFα following stimulation. However, leukocytes from these patients also displayed impaired stimulus-dependent signaling through the IL-6 receptor. 4 DNA sequence analysis revealed distinct mutations in the DNA-binding region and SH2 domain of STAT3 in HIES patients. 4 These studies clearly demonstrate that autosomal dominant and sporadic forms of HIES are caused by mutations in the gene encoding STAT3, a key transcription activator following cytokineor growth factor stimulation, thereby explaining the diverse nature

of the disease. Given the involvement of STAT3SOCS3 in recruitment of myeloid cells and execution of anti-inflammatory responses in mature immune cells, 199 the finding is of significant importance for increased understanding of the regulation of inflammation in general. Moreover, the studies strongly provide support to the idea that microarray-based studies can be used as a first-tier approach for the identification of the genetic basis of hereditary immune disorders.

## CONCLUSIONS

The advent of systems biology technologies, such as microarray and proteome analyses, has provided a means to globally interrogate the molecular events governing host-pathogen interactions. Because of

<!-- image -->

TABLE 1 Selected Processes or Functions of Neutrophils Discovered Using Genome-Wide Approaches

| Function or Process                    | Discovery or Conclusion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Ref.        |
|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| Granulopoiesis                         | Positive correlation between protein and mRNA levels during neutrophil development                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 26-28       |
|                                        | Temporal regulation of transcripts encoding granule proteins during neutrophilic differentiation of human primary bone marrow progenitors.                                                                                                                                                                                      | 35          |
|                                        | Lineage specificity in gene expression among hematopoietic cells.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 33          |
|                                        | Mature neutrophils have increased capacity to respond to interferon (IFN)-gamma                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 29          |
|                                        | Coordinate gene regulation during cellular differentiation is influenced by chromosomal organization                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 12          |
| Recruitment                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |             |
| Priming                                | Comprehensive view of the similarities and differences between priming agents and phagocytic stimuli                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 54          |
|                                        | Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) elicits changes in expression of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 66, 68      |
| Transmigration                         | Regulates cell fate and promotes wound healing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 30          |
| Spontaneous apoptosis                  | Comprehensive view of molecules involved in the loss of neutrophil function during apoptosis. This study reveals the remarkable number of host defense-related molecules that are down regulated during constitutive (spontaneous) neutrophil apoptosis                                                                         | 58          |
| Phagocytosis                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |             |
| Phagocytosis-induced cell death (PICD) | Phagocytosis induces a neutrophil apoptosis differentiation program, a final stage of transcriptionally regulated PMN maturation. Neutrophil programmed cell death is regulated at the level of gene expression, and thus PMN gene regulation facilitates                                                                       | 95, 96, 126 |
|                                        | Comprehensive view of the down-regulation of pro-inflammatory capacity during PICD. The study highlights the sheer magnitude of change in pro-inflammatory molecules during apoptosis                                                                                                                                           | 126         |
|                                        | Bacterial pathogens modulate the neutrophil apoptosis differentiation program. This work forms the basis of a new paradigm for the resolution of infection. The discovery is that there are two possible outcomes of neutrophil-bacteria interactions; one leads to resolution of infection and the other to disease (Figure 4) | 96          |
|                                        | PICD is delayed in neutrophils from chronic granulomatous disease patients and ROS are critical for PICD                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 191         |
|                                        | Neutrophil phagosomes contain proteins typically associated with the endoplasmic reticulum. This finding suggests neutrophil phagosomes have potential for antigen processing                                                                                                                                                   | 104         |
| Delayed apoptosis                      | A. phagocytophilum fails to induce the apoptosis differentiation program in human neutrophils                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 97, 101-103 |
|                                        | GM-CSF enhances neutrophil pro-inflammatory capacity by up regulating dozens of molecules involved in host defense. Neutrophils have potential for antigen presentation.                                                                                                                                                        | 58          |

these genome-wide approaches, we now know that neutrophils have significant biosynthetic potential and therefore, their role in the innate immune system is being reconsidered more broadly. Systems biologylevel approaches have enabled molecular dissection of key neutrophil processes or functions, including post-phagocytosis sequelae and many new discoveries have been made (Table1). The idea that neutrophils actively participate in processes beyond phagocytosis and killing of microbes is a relatively recent concept

and there is now considerable effort directed to understand the role of PMNs in the resolution of inflammation.

Current genome-wide approaches with neutrophils primarily involve analysis of transcriptome or proteome. However, future systems-level studies will likely include analysis of lipid mediators, such as lipoxins, resolvins, and protectins, which have an essential role in the resolution of inflammation. 200 Indeed, recent metabolome studies by Serhan and colleagues

<!-- image -->

revealed that human PMNs convert resolvin E1 to novel metabolic products that have potent antiinflammatory activities. 201 This line of investigation is especially intriguing for system-level analyses, since it is possible to predict synthesis of these novel compounds using lipidomics and then test function. 202,203 It will be important to investigate relative production of these mediators during interaction of neutrophils with bacterial pathogens.

There is little doubt that whole-genome sequencing will play a prominent role in future studies directed to elucidate the molecular genetic basis of immune disorders, including those that involve neutrophils and host defense. This systems-level approach has already been implemented for discovery of tumor-specific somatic mutations, as Ley et al. used whole-genome

sequencing to identify eight new mutations associated with acute myeloid leukemia. 204 For a true systems biology analysis of the role of neutrophils in innate immunity, it will be important to develop tools that integrate data sets from multiple laboratories into a user-friendly platform from which to ask important questions. There is a significant challenge in the integration of enormous data sets generated across a diversity of platforms. Comparison of systems-level studies in neutrophils is further confounded by apparent functional discrepancies between primary human neutrophils, in vitro cell lines ( e g . . HL-60), and experimental animal model systems. Despite these caveats, significant progress has been toward a comprehensive understanding of neutrophil functions and the role of these cells in innate immunity.

## NOTES

This article was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health. We thank Christopher Burlak and David W. Dorward for their help in generating the transmission electron micrographs.

## REFERENCES

- 1. Homburg CH, Roos D. Apoptosis of neutrophils. Curr Opin Hematol 1996, 3:94-99.
- 2. Kasprisin DO, Harris MB. The role of RNA metabolism in polymorphonuclear leukocyte phagocytosis. J Lab Clin Med 1977, 90:118-124.
- 3. Kasprisin DO, Harris MB. The role of protein synthesis in polymorphonuclear leukocyte phagocytosis II. Exp Hematol 1978, 6:585-589.
- 4. Holland SM, DeLeo FR, Elloumi HZ, Hsu AP, Uzel G, et al. STAT3 Mutations in the Hyper-IgE Syndrome. N Engl J Med 2007, 357:1608-1619.
- 5. Friedman AD. Transcriptional regulation of granulocyte and monocyte development. Oncogene 2002, 21:3377-3390.
- 6. McDonald PP. Transcriptional regulation in neutrophils: teaching old cells new tricks. Adv Immunol 2004, 8:21-48.
- 7. Bainton DF, Ullyot JL, Farquhar MG. The development of neutrophilic polymorphonuclear leukocytes in human bone marrow. J Exp Med 1971, 134:907-934.
- 8. Cline MJ. Phagocytosis and synthesis of ribonucleic acid in human granulocytes. Nature 1966, 212:1431-1433.

- 9. Cline MJ. Ribonucleic acid biosynthesis in human leukocytes. Effects of phagocytosis on RNA metabolism. Blood 1966, 28:188-200.
- 10. Walmsley SR, Print C, Farahi N, Peyssonnaux C, Johnson RS, et al. Hypoxia-induced neutrophil survival is mediated by HIF-1alpha-dependent NFkappaB activity. J Exp Med 2005, 201:105-115.
- 11. Jonsson H, Allen P, Peng SL. Inflammatory arthritis requires Foxo3a to prevent Fas ligand-induced neutrophil apoptosis. Nat Med 2005, 11:666-671.
- 12. Kosak ST, Scalzo D, Alworth SV, Li F, Palmer S, et al. Coordinate gene regulation during hematopoiesis is related to genomic organization. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e309.
- 13. Johnnidis JB, Harris MH, Wheeler RT, Stehling-Sun S, Lam MH, et al. Regulation of progenitor cell proliferation and granulocyte function by microRNA-223. Nature 2008, 451:1125-1129.
- 14. Lindemann SW, Yost CC, Denis MM, McIntyre TM, Weyrich AS, et al. Neutrophils alter the inflammatory milieu by signal-dependent translation of constitutive messenger RNAs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004, 101:7076-7081.
- 15. Yost CC, Denis MM, Lindemann S, Rubner FJ, Marathe GK, et al. Activated polymorphonuclear

- leukocytes rapidly synthesize retinoic acid receptoralpha: a mechanism for translational control of transcriptional events. J Exp Med 2004, 200:671-680.
- 16. Cline MJ. Production and distribution of neutrophils. In: Cline MJ ed. The White Cell . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; 1975, 22-38.
- 17. Athens JW, Haab OP, Raab SO, Mauer AM, Ashenbrucker H, et al. Leukokinetic studies. IV. The total blood, circulating and marginal granulocyte pools and the granulocyte turnover rate in normal subjects. J Clin Invest 1961, 40:989-995.
- 18. Dale DC, Liles WC, Llewellyn C, Price TH. Effects of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) on neutrophil kinetics and function in normal human volunteers. AmJHematol 1998, 57:7-15.
- 19. Dancey JT, Deubelbeiss KA, Harker LA, Finch CA. Neutrophil kinetics in man. J Clin Invest 1976, 58:705-715.
- 20. Cronkite EP, Fliedner TM. Granulocytopoiesis. N Engl J Med 1964, 270:1403-1408.
- 21. Fliedner TM, Cronkite EP, Robertson JS. Granulocytopoiesis. I. Senescence and random loss of neutrophilic granulocytes in human beings. Blood 1964, 24:402-414.
- 22. Fliedner TM, Cronkite EP, Killmann SA, Bond VP. Granulocytopoiesis. II. Emergence and pattern of labeling of neutrophilic granulocytes in humans. Blood 1964, 24:683-700.
- 23. Orr Y, Wilson DP, Taylor JM, Bannon PG, Geczy C, et al. A kinetic model of bone marrow neutrophil production that characterizes late phenotypic maturation. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2007, 292:R1707-R1716.
- 24. Aglietta M, Piacibello W, Sanavio F, Stacchini A, Apra F, et al. Kinetics of human hemopoietic cells after in vivo administration of granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor. J Clin Invest 1989, 83:551-557.
- 25. Laterveer L, Lindley IJ, Heemskerk DP, Camps JA, Pauwels EK, et al. Rapid mobilization of hematopoietic progenitor cells in rhesus monkeys by a single intravenous injection of interleukin-8. Blood 1996, 87:781-788.
- 26. Lian Z, Wang L, Yamaga S, Bonds W, BeazerBarclay Y, et al. Genomic and proteomic analysis of the myeloid differentiation program. Blood 2001, 98:513-524.
- 27. Lian Z, Kluger Y, Greenbaum DS, Tuck D, Gerstein M, et al. Genomic and proteomic analysis of the myeloid differentiation program: global analysis of gene expression during induced differentiation in the MPRO cell line. Blood 2002, 100:3209-3220.
- 28. Iida S, Kohro T, Kodama T, Nagata S, Fukunaga R. Identification of CCR2, flotillin, and gp49B genes as

- newG-CSFtargets during neutrophilic differentiation. J Leukoc Biol 2005, 78:481-490.
- 29. Martinelli S, Urosevic M, Daryadel A, Oberholzer PA, Baumann C, et al. Induction of genes mediating interferon-dependent extracellular trap formation during neutrophil differentiation. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:44123-44132.
- 30. Theilgaard-Monch K, Knudsen S, Follin P, Borregaard N. The transcriptional activation program of human neutrophils in skin lesions supports their important role in wound healing. J Immunol 2004, 172:7684-7693.
- 31. Ferrari F, Bortoluzzi S, Coppe A, Basso D, Bicciato S, et al. Genomic expression during human myelopoiesis. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:264.
- 32. Mollinedo F, Lopez-Perez R, Gajate C. Differential gene expression patterns coupled to commitment and acquisition of phenotypic hallmarks during neutrophil differentiation of human leukaemia HL-60 cells. Gene 2008, 419:16-26.
- 33. Kluger Y, Tuck DP, Chang JT, Nakayama Y, Poddar R, et al. Lineage specificity of gene expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004, 101:6508-6513.
- 34. Theilgaard-Monch K, Porse BT, Borregaard N. Systems biology of neutrophil differentiation and immune response. Curr Opin Immunol 2006, 18:54-60.
- 35. Theilgaard-Monch K, Jacobsen LC, Borup R, Rasmussen T, Bjerregaard MD, et al. The transcriptional program of terminal granulocytic differentiation. Blood 2005, 105:1785-1796.
- 36. Le CV, Cowland JB, Calafat J, Borregaard N. Targeting of proteins to granule subsets is determined by timing and not by sorting: the specific granule protein NGAL is localized to azurophil granules when expressed in HL-60 cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996, 93:6454-6457.
- 37. Lawrence MB, Springer TA. Leukocytes roll on a selectin at physiologic flow rates: distinction from and prerequisite for adhesion through integrins. Cell 1991, 65:859-873.
- 38. Muller WA, Weigl SA, Deng X, Phillips DM. PECAM1 is required for transendothelial migration of leukocytes. J Exp Med 1993, 178:449-460.
- 39. Diamond MS, Staunton DE, de Fougerolles AR, Stacker SA, Garcia-Aguilar J, et al. ICAM-1 (CD54): a counter-receptor for Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18). J Cell Biol 1990, 111:3129-3139.
- 40. Khan AI, Kerfoot SM, Heit B, Liu L, Andonegui G, et al. Role of CD44 and hyaluronan in neutrophil recruitment. J Immunol 2004, 173:7594-7601.
- 41. Cooper D, Lindberg FP, Gamble JR, Brown EJ, Vadas MA. Transendothelial migration of neutrophils involves integrinassociated protein (CD47). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995, 92:3978-3982.

<!-- image -->

- 42. Walz A, Peveri P, Aschauer H, Baggiolini M. Purification and amino acid sequencing of NAF, a novel neutrophil-activating factor produced by monocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1987, 149:755-761.
- 43. Yoshimura T, Matsushima K, Tanaka S, Robinson EA, Appella E, et al. Purification of a human monocyte-derived neutrophil chemotactic factor that has peptide sequence similarity to other host defense cytokines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1987, 84:9233-9237.
- 44. Ehrengruber MU, Geiser T, Deranleau DA. Activation of human neutrophils by C3a and C5A: comparison of the effects on shape changes, chemotaxis, secretion, and respiratory burst. FEBS Lett 1994, 346:181-184.
- 45. Showell HJ, Freer RJ, Zigmond SH, Shiffmann E, Aswanikumar S, et al. The structure-activity relations of synthetic peptides as chemotactic factors and inducers of lysosomal enzyme secretion for neutrophils. J Exp Med 1976, 143:1154-1169.
- 46. Schmeling DJ, Peterson PK, Hammerschmidt DE, Kim Y, Verhoef J, et al. Chemotaxigenesis by cell surface components of Staphylococcus aureus. Infect Immun 1979, 26:57-63.
- 47. Boxer LA, Axtell R, Suchard S. The role of the neutrophil in inflammatory diseases of the lung. Blood Cells 1990, 16:25-42.
- 48. Edwards SW, Hallett MB. Seeing the wood for the trees: the forgotten role of neutrophils in rheumatoid arthritis. Immunol Today 1997, 18:320-324.
- 49. Swain SD, Rohn TT, Quinn MT. Neutrophil priming in host defense: role of oxidants as priming agents. Antioxid Redox Signal 2002, 4:69-83.
- 50. Sheppard FR, Kelher MR, Moore EE, McLaughlin NJ, Banerjee A, et al. Structural organization of the neutrophil NADPH oxidase: phosphorylation and translocation during priming and activation. J Leukoc Biol 2005, 78:1025-1042.
- 51. Guthrie LA, McPhail LC, Henson PM, Johnston RB Jr. Priming of neutrophils for enhanced release of oxygen metabolites by bacterial lipopolysaccharide. Evidence for increased activity of the superoxideproducing enzyme. J Exp Med 1984, 160:1656-1671.
- 52. Kobayashi SD, Voyich JM, Burlak C, DeLeo FR. Neutrophils in the innate immune response. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz) 2005, 53:505-517.
- 53. DeLeo FR, Renee J, Mccormick S, Nakamura M, Apicella M, et al. Neutrophils exposed to bacterial lipopolysaccharide upregulate NADPH oxidase assembly. J Clin Invest 1998, 101:455-463.
- 54. Zhang XQ, Kluger Y, Nakayama Y, Poddar R, Whitney C, et al. Gene expression in mature neutrophils: early responses to inflammatory stimuli. J Leukoc Biol 2004, 75:358-372.
- 55. Boldt K, Rist W, Weiss SM, Weith A, Lenter MC. FPRL-1 induces modifications of migration-associated

- proteins in human neutrophils. Proteomics 2006, 6:4790-4799.
- 56. Coldren CD, Nick JA, Poch KR, Woolum MD, Fouty BW, et al. Functional and genomic changes induced by alveolar transmigration in human neutrophils. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2006, 291:L1267-L1276.
- 57. Suzuki S, Kobayashi M, Chiba K, Horiuchi I, Wang J, et al. Autocrine production of epithelial cellderived neutrophil attractant-78 induced by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in neutrophils. Blood 2002, 99:1863-1865.
- 58. Kobayashi SD, Voyich JM, Whitney AR, DeLeo FR. Spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis and regulation of cell survival by granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor. J Leukoc Biol 2005, 78:1408-1418.
- 59. Whyte MK, Meagher LC, MacDermot J, Haslett C. Impairment of function in aging neutrophils is associated with apoptosis. J Immunol 1993, 150:5124-5134.
- 60. Cohn ZA, Morse SI. Functional and metabolic properties of polymorphonuclear leucocytes. II. The influence of a lipopolysaccharide endotoxin. J Exp Med 1960, 111:689-704.
- 61. Dahinden CA, Galanos C, Fehr J. Granulocyte activation by endotoxin. I. Correlation between adherence and other granulocyte functions, and role of endotoxin structure on biologic activity. J Immunol 1983, 130:857-862.
- 62. Sabroe I, Jones EC, Usher LR, Whyte MK, Dower SK. Toll-like receptor (TLR)2 and TLR4 in human peripheral blood granulocytes: a critical role for monocytes in leukocyte lipopolysaccharide responses. J Immunol 2002, 168:4701-4710.
- 63. Tsukahara Y, Lian Z, Zhang XQ, Whitney C, Kluger Y, et al. Gene expression in human neutrophils during activation and priming by bacterial lipopolysaccharide. J Cell Biochem 2003, 89:848-861.
- 64. O'Neill AJ, Doyle BT, Molloy E, Watson C, Phelan D, et al. Gene expression profile of inflammatory neutrophils: alterations in the inhibitors of apoptosis proteins during spontaneous and delayed apoptosis. Shock 2004, 21:512-518.
- 65. Silva E, Arcaroli J, He Q, Svetkauskaite D, Coldren C, et al. HMGB1 and LPS induce distinct patterns of gene expression and activation in neutrophils from patients with sepsis-induced acute lung injury. Intensive Care Med 2007, 33:1829-1839.
- 66. Fessler MB, Malcolm KC, Duncan MW, Worthen GS. Agenomic and proteomic analysis of activation of the human neutrophil by lipopolysaccharide and its mediation by p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:31291-31302.
- 67. Tamassia N, Le MV, Calzetti F, Donini M, Gasperini S, et al. The MyD88-independent pathway is not

- mobilized in human neutrophils stimulated via TLR4. J Immunol 2007, 178:7344-7356.
- 68. Malcolm KC, Arndt PG, Manos EJ, Jones DA, Worthen GS. Microarray analysis of lipopolysaccharide-treated human neutrophils. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2003, 284:L663-L670.
- 69. Hayashi F, Means TK, Luster AD. Toll-like receptors stimulate human neutrophil function. Blood 2003, 102:2660-2669.
- 70. Sabroe I, Prince LR, Jones EC, Horsburgh MJ, Foster SJ, et al. Selective roles for Toll-like receptor (TLR)2 and TLR4 in the regulation of neutrophil activation and life span. J Immunol 2003, 170:5268-5275.
- 71. Kurt-Jones EA, Mandell L, Whitney C, Padgett A, Gosselin K, et al. Role of toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in neutrophil activation: GM-CSF enhances TLR2 expression and TLR2-mediated interleukin 8 responses in neutrophils. Blood 2002, 100:1860-1868.
- 72. Bellocchio S, Moretti S, Perruccio K, Fallarino F, Bozza S, et al. TLRs govern neutrophil activity in aspergillosis. J Immunol 2004, 173:7406-7415.
- 73. Lotz S, Aga E, Wilde I, van ZG, Hartung T, et al. Highly purified lipoteichoic acid activates neutrophil granulocytes and delays their spontaneous apoptosis via CD14 and TLR2. J Leukoc Biol 2004, 75:467-477.
- 74. Mantovani B. Different roles of IgG and complement receptors in phagocytosis by polymorphonuclear leukocytes. J Immunol 1975, 115:15-17.
- 75. Nauseef WM, Clark RA. Granulocytic phagocytes. In: Mandell G, Bennett JE, Dolin R. eds. Principles and Practica of Infectious Diseases . New York: Churchill Livingstone; 2000, 89-112.
- 76. Fleit HB, Wright SD, Unkeless JC. Human neutrophil Fc gamma receptor distribution and structure. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1982, 79:3275-3279.
- 77. Albrechtsen M, Yeaman GR, Kerr MA. Characterization of the IgA receptor from human polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Immunology 1988, 64:201-205.
- 78. Gounni AS, Lamkhioued B, Koussih L, Ra C, Renzi PM,et al. Human neutrophils express the high-affinity receptor for immunoglobulin E (Fc epsilon RI): role in asthma. FASEB J 2001, 15:940-949.
- 79. Eggleton P, Ghebrehiwet B, Sastry KN, Coburn JP, Zaner KS, et al. Identification of a gC1q-binding protein (gC1q-R) on the surface of human neutrophils. Subcellular localization and binding properties in comparison with the cC1q-R. J Clin Invest 1995, 95:1569-1578.
- 80. Rabellino EM, Ross GD, Polley MJ. Membrane receptors of mouse leukocytes. I. Two types of complement receptors for different regions of C3. J Immunol 1978, 120:879-885.

- 81. Ross GD, Jarowski CI, Rabellino EM, Winchester RJ. The sequential appearance of Ia-like antigens and two different complement receptors during the maturation of human neutrophils. J Exp Med 1978, 147:730-744.
- 82. Dana N, Todd RF III, Pitt J, Springer TA, Arnaout MA. Deficiency of a surface membrane glycoprotein (Mo1) in man. J Clin Invest 1984, 73:153-159.
- 83. Hickstein DD, Ozols J, Williams SA, Baenziger JU, Locksley RM, et al. Isolation and characterization of the receptor on human neutrophils that mediates cellular adherence. J Biol Chem 1987, 262:5576-5580.
- 84. MyonesBL,Dalzell JG, Hogg N, Ross GD. Neutrophil and monocyte cell surface p150,95 has iC3b-receptor (CR4) activity resembling CR3. J Clin Invest 1988, 82:640-651.
- 85. Quinn MT, Gauss KA. Structure and regulation of the neutrophil respiratory burst oxidase: comparison with non-phagocyte oxidases. J Leukoc Biol 2004, 76:760-781.
- 86. Guichard C, Pedruzzi E, Dewas C, Fay M, Pouzet C, et al. Interleukin-8-induced priming of neutrophil oxidative burst requires sequential recruitment of NADPH oxidase components into lipid rafts. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:37021-37032.
- 87. Dang PMC, Dewas C, Gaudry M, Fay M, Pedruzzi E, et al. Priming of human neutrophil respiratory burst by granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) involves partial phosphorylation of p47 phox . J Biol Chem 1999, 274:20704-20708.
- 88. Brown GE, Stewart MQ, Bissonnette SA, Elia AEH, Wilker E, et al. Distinct ligand-dependent roles for p38 MAPK in priming and activation of the neutrophil NADPH oxidase. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:27059-27068.
- 89. Klebanoff SJ. Myeloperoxidase-halide-hydrogen peroxide antibacterial system. J Bacteriol 1968, 95:2131-2138.
- 90. Klebanoff SJ. Role of the superoxide anion in the myeloperoxidase-mediated antimicrobial system. J Biol Chem 1974, 249:3724-3728.
- 91. Rosen H, Klebanoff SJ. Formation of singlet oxygen by the myeloperoxidase-mediated antimicrobial system. J Biol Chem 1977, 252:4803-4810.
- 92. Rosen H, Klebanoff SJ. Bactericidal activity of a superoxide anion-generating system. A model for the polymorphonuclear leukocyte. J Exp Med 1979, 149:27-39.
- 93. Kobayashi SD, DeLeo FR. An apoptosis differentiation programme in human polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Biochem Soc Trans 2004, 32:474-476.
- 94. Subrahmanyam YVBK, Yamaga S, Prashar Y, Lee HH, Hoe NP, et al. RNA expression patterns change dramatically in human neutrophils exposed to bacteria. Blood 2001, 97:2457-2468.

<!-- image -->

- 95. Kobayashi SD, Voyich JM, Buhl CL, Stahl RM, DeLeo FR. Global changes in gene expression by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes during receptor-mediated phagocytosis: cell fate is regulated at the level of gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002, 99:6901-6906.
- 96. Kobayashi SD, Braughton KR, Whitney AR, Voyich JM, Schwan TG, et al. Bacterial pathogens modulate an apoptosis differentiation program in human neutrophils. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003, 100:10948-10953.
- 97. Borjesson DL, Kobayashi SD, Whitney AR, Voyich JM, Argue CM, et al. Insights into pathogen immune evasion mechanisms: Anaplasma phagocytophilum fails to induce an apoptosis differentiation program in human neutrophils. J Immunol 2005, 174:6364-6372.
- 98. Suttmann H, Lehan N, Bohle A, Brandau S. Stimulation of neutrophil granulocytes with Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin induces changes in phenotype and gene expression and inhibits spontaneous apoptosis. Infect Immun 2003, 71:4647-4656.
- 99. Mullick A, Elias M, Harakidas P, Marcil A, WhitewayM,et al. Gene expression in HL60 granulocytoids and human polymorphonuclear leukocytes exposed to Candida albicans. Infect Immun 2004, 72:414-429.
- 100. Fradin C, Mavor AL, Weindl G, Schaller M, Hanke K, et al. The early transcriptional response of human granulocytes to infection with Candida albicans is not essential for killing but reflects cellular communications. Infect Immun 2007, 75:1493-1501.
- 101. Sukumaran B, Carlyon JA, Cai JL, Berliner N, Fikrig E. Early transcriptional response of human neutrophils to Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection. Infect Immun 2005, 73:8089-8099.
- 102. Lee HC, Kioi M, Han J, Puri RK, Goodman JL. Anaplasma phagocytophilum-induced gene expression in both human neutrophils and HL-60 cells. Genomics 2008, 92:144-151.
- 103. Lee HC, Goodman JL. Anaplasma phagocytophilum causes global induction of antiapoptosis in human neutrophils. Genomics 2006, 88:496-503.
- 104. Burlak C, Whitney AR, Mead DJ, Hackstadt T, DeLeo FR. Maturation of human neutrophil phagosomes includes incorporation of molecular chaperones and endoplasmic reticulum quality control machinery. Mol Cell Proteomics 2006, 5:620-634.
- 105. Garin J, Diez R, Kieffer S, Dermine JF, Duclos S, et al. The phagosome proteome: insight into phagosome functions. J Cell Biol 2001, 152:165-180.
- 106. Gagnon E, Duclos S, Rondeau C, Chevet E, Cameron PH, et al. Endoplasmic reticulum-mediated phagocytosis is a mechanism of entry into macrophages. Cell 2002, 110:119-131.

- 107. Touret N, Paroutis P, Terebiznik M, Harrison RE, Trombetta S, et al. Quantitative and dynamic assessment of the contribution of the ER to phagosome formation. Cell 2005, 123:157-170.
- 108. Touret N, Paroutis P, Grinstein S. The nature of the phagosomal membrane: endoplasmic reticulum versus plasmalemma. J Leukoc Biol 2005, 77:878-885.
- 109. Gagnon E, Bergeron JJ, Desjardins M. ER-mediated phagocytosis: myth or reality? J Leukoc Biol 2005, 77:843-845.
- 110. HoudeM,Bertholet S, Gagnon E, Brunet S, Goyette G, et al. Phagosomes are competent organelles for antigen cross-presentation. Nature 2003, 425:402-406.
- 111. Ackerman AL, Kyritsis C, Tampe R, Cresswell P. Early phagosomes in dendritic cells form a cellular compartment sufficient for cross presentation of exogenous antigens. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003, 100:12889-12894.
- 112. Guermonprez P, Saveanu L, Kleijmeer M, Davoust J, van EP, et al. ER-phagosome fusion defines an MHC class I cross-presentation compartment in dendritic cells. Nature 2003, 425:397-402.
- 113. Lominadze G, Powell DW, Luerman GC, Link AJ, Ward RA, et al. Proteomic analysis of human neutrophil granules. Mol Cell Proteomics 2005, 4:1503-1521.
- 114. Jethwaney D, Islam MR, Leidal KG, de Bernabe DB, Campbell KP, et al. Proteomic analysis of plasma membrane and secretory vesicles from human neutrophils. Proteome Sci 2007, 5:12.
- 115. Savill J. Apoptosis in resolution of inflammation. J Leukoc Biol 1997, 61:375-380.
- 116. Shi J, Gilbert GE, Kokubo Y, Ohashi T. Role of the liver in regulating numbers of circulating neutrophils. Blood 2001, 98:1226-1230.
- 117. Savill JS, Wyllie AH, Henson JE, Walport MJ, Henson PM, et al. Macrophage phagocytosis of aging neutrophils in inflammation. Programmed cell death in the neutrophil leads to its recognition by macrophages. J Clin Invest 1989, 83:865-875.
- 118. Meagher LC, Cousin JM, Seckl JR, Haslett C. Opposing effects of glucocorticoids on the rate of apoptosis in neutrophilic and eosinophilic granulocytes. J Immunol 1996, 156:4422-4428.
- 119. Hannah S, Mecklenburgh K, Rahman I, Bellingan GJ, Greening A, et al. Hypoxia prolongs neutrophil survival in vitro. FEBS Lett 1995, 372:233-237.
- 120. Murray J, Barbara JA, Dunkley SA, Lopez AF, Van OX, et al. Regulation of neutrophil apoptosis by tumor necrosis factor-alpha: requirement for TNFR55 and TNFR75 for induction of apoptosis in vitro. Blood 1997, 90:2772-2783.

- 121. Whyte MK, Hardwick SJ, Meagher LC, Savill JS, Haslett C. Transient elevations of cytosolic free calcium retard subsequent apoptosis in neutrophils in vitro. J Clin Invest 1993, 92:446-455.
- 122. Bours MJ, Swennen EL, Di VF, Cronstein BN, Dagnelie PC. Adenosine 5'-triphosphate and adenosine as endogenous signaling molecules in immunity and inflammation. Pharmacol Ther 2006, 112:358-404.
- 123. Savill JS, Henson PM, Haslett C. Phagocytosis of aged human neutrophils by macrophages is mediated by a novel ''charge-sensitive'' recognition mechanism. J Clin Invest 1989, 84:1518-1527.
- 124. Hart SP, Ross JA, Ross K, Haslett C, Dransfield I. Molecular characterization of the surface of apoptotic neutrophils: Implications for functional downregulation and recognition by phagocytes. Cell Death Differ 2000, 7:493-503.
- 125. Homburg CH, de HM, von dem Borne AE, Verhoeven AJ, Reutelingsperger CP, et al. Human neutrophils lose their surface Fc gamma RIII and acquire Annexin V binding sites during apoptosis in vitro. Blood 1995, 85:532-540.
- 126. Kobayashi SD, Voyich JM, Braughton KR, DeLeo FR. Down-regulation of proinflammatory capacity during apoptosis in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. J Immunol 2003, 170:3357-3368.
- 127. Fadok VA, Savill JS, Haslett C, Bratton DL, Doherty DE, et al. Different populations of macrophages use either the vitronectin receptor or the phosphatidylserine receptor to recognize and remove apoptotic cells. J Immunol 1992, 149:4029-4035.
- 128. Lane TA, Lamkin GE. A reassessmnt of the energy requirements for neutrophil migration: adenosine triphosphate depletion enhances chemotaxis. Blood 1984, 64:986-993.
- 129. Peachman KK, Lyles DS, Bass DA. Mitochondria in eosinophils: functional role in apoptosis but not respiration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001, 98:1717-1722.
- 130. Fossati G, Moulding DA, Spiller DG, Moots RJ, White MR, et al. The mitochondrial network of human neutrophils: role in chemotaxis, phagocytosis, respiratory burst activation, and commitment to apoptosis. J Immunol 2003, 170:1964-1972.
- 131. Maianski NA, Mul FP, Van Buul JD, Roos D, Kuijpers TW. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor inhibits the mitochondria-dependent activation of caspase-3 in neutrophils. Blood 2002, 99:672-679.
- 132. Pryde JG, Walker A, Rossi AG, Hannah S, Haslett C. Temperature-dependent arrest of neutrophil apoptosis. Failure of Bax insertion into mitochondria at 15 degrees C prevents the release of cytochrome c. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:33574-33584.

- 133. Maianski NA, Geissler J, Srinivasula SM, Alnemri ES, Roos D, et al. Functional characterization of mitochondria in neutrophils: a role restricted to apoptosis. Cell Death Differ 2004, 11:143-153.
- 134. El KD, Jozsef L, Khreiss T, Filep JG. Inhibition of K+ efflux prevents mitochondrial dysfunction, and suppresses caspase-3-, apoptosis-inducing factor-, and endonuclease G-mediated constitutive apoptosis in human neutrophils. Cell Signal 2006, 18:2302-2313.
- 135. Murphy BM, O'Neill AJ, Adrain C, Watson RW, Martin SJ. The apoptosome pathway to caspase activation in primary human neutrophils exhibits dramatically reduced requirements for cytochrome C. J Exp Med 2003, 197:625-632.
- 136. Hill JM, Vaidyanathan H, Ramos JW, Ginsberg MH, Werner MH. Recognition of ERK MAP kinase by PEA-15 reveals a common docking site within the death domain and death effector domain. EMBO J 2002, 21:6494-6504.
- 137. Khwaja A, Tatton L. Caspase-mediated proteolysis and activation of protein kinase Cdelta plays a central role in neutrophil apoptosis. Blood 1999, 94:291-301.
- 138. Brown SB, Savill J. Phagocytosis triggers macrophage release of Fas ligand and induces apoptosis of bystander leukocytes. J Immunol 1999, 162:480-485.
- 139. Scheel-Toellner D, Wang K, Craddock R, Webb PR, McGettrick HM, et al. Reactive oxygen species limit neutrophil life span by activating death receptor signaling. Blood 2004, 104:2557-2564.
- 140. Liles WC, Kiener PA, Ledbetter JA, Aruffo A, Klebanoff SJ. Differential expression of Fas (CD95) and Fas ligand on normal human phagocytes: Implications for the regulation of apoptosis in neutrophils. J Exp Med 1996, 184:429-440.
- 141. Renshaw SA, Parmar JS, Singleton V, Rowe SJ, Dockrell DH, et al. Acceleration of human neutrophil apoptosis by TRAIL. J Immunol 2003, 170:1027-1033.
- 142. Scheel-Toellner D, Wang K, Assi LK, Webb PR, Craddock RM, et al. Clustering of death receptors in lipid rafts initiates neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis. Biochem Soc Trans 2004, 32:679-681.
- 143. Conus S, Perozzo R, Reinheckel T, Peters C, Scapozza L, et al. Caspase-8 is activated by cathepsin D initiating neutrophil apoptosis during the resolution of inflammation. J Exp Med 2008, 205:685-698.
- 144. Zhang B, Hirahashi J, Cullere X, Mayadas TN. Elucidation of molecular events leading to neutrophil apoptosis following phagocytosis: cross-talk between caspase 8, reactive oxygen species, and MAPK/ERK activation. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:28443-28454.
- 145. Baumann R, Casaulta C, Simon D, Conus S, Yousefi S, et al. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor delays apoptosis in neutrophils by inhibiting the

<!-- image -->

- mitochondria-dependent death pathway. FASEB J 2003, 17:2221-2230.
- 146. varado-Kristensson M, Melander F, Leandersson K, Ronnstrand L, Wernstedt C, et al. p38-MAPK signals survival by phosphorylation of caspase-8 and caspase-3 in human neutrophils. J Exp Med 2004, 199:449-458.
- 147. DeLeo FR. Modulation of phagocyte apoptosis by bacterial pathogens. Apoptosis 2004, 9:399-413.
- 148. Colotta F, Re F, Polentarutti N, Sozzani S, Mantovani A. Modulation of granulocyte survival and programmed cell death by cytokines and bacterial products. Blood 1992, 80:2012-2020.
- 149. Biffl WL, Moore EE, Moore FA, Barnett CC Jr. Interleukin-6 suppression of neutrophil apoptosis is neutrophil concentration dependent. J Leukoc Biol 1995, 58:582-584.
- 150. Kettritz R, Gaido ML, Haller H, Luft FC, Jennette CJ, et al. Interleukin-8 delays spontaneous and tumor necrosis factor-alpha-mediated apoptosis of human neutrophils. Kidney Int 1998, 53:84-91.
- 151. Dunican AL, Leuenroth SJ, Grutkoski P, Ayala A, Simms HH. TNFalpha-induced suppression of PMN apoptosis is mediated through interleukin-8 production. Shock 2000, 14:284-288.
- 152. Sakamoto E, Hato F, Kato T, Sakamoto C, Akahori M, et al. Type I and type II interferons delay human neutrophil apoptosis via activation of STAT3 and up-regulation of cellular inhibitor of apoptosis 2. J Leukoc Biol 2005, 78:301-309.
- 153. Lee A, Whyte MK, Haslett C. Inhibition of apoptosis and prolongation of neutrophil functional longevity by inflammatory mediators. J Leukoc Biol 1993, 54:283-288.
- 154. van den Berg JM, Weyer S, Weening JJ, Roos D, Kuijpers TW. Divergent effects of tumor necrosis factor alpha on apoptosis of human neutrophils. J Leukoc Biol 2001, 69:467-473.
- 155. Avdi NJ, Nick JA, Whitlock BB, Billstrom MA, Henson PM, et al. Tumor necrosis factorα activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway in human neutrophils. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:2189-2199.
- 156. Ward C, Chilvers ER, Lawson MF, Pryde JG, Fujihara S, et al. NF-kappaB activation is a critical regulator of human granulocyte apoptosis in vitro. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:4309-4318.
- 157. Whitlock BB, Gardai S, Fadok V, Bratton D, Henson PM. Differential roles for alpha(M)beta(2) integrin clustering or activation in the control of apoptosis via regulation of akt and ERK survival mechanisms. J Cell Biol 2000, 151:1305-1320.
- 158. Rubel C, Gomez S, Fernandez GC, Isturiz MA, Caamano J, et al. Fibrinogen-CD11b/CD18 interaction

- activates the NF-kappa B pathway and delays apoptosis in human neutrophils. Eur J Immunol 2003, 33:1429-1438.
- 159. Gardai S, Whitlock BB, Helgason C, Ambruso D, Fadok V, et al. Activation of SHIP by NADPH oxidase-stimulated Lyn leads to enhanced apoptosis in neutrophils. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:5236-5246.
- 160. Francois S, El BJ, Dang PM, Pedruzzi E, GougerotPocidalo MA, et al. Inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis by TLR agonists in whole blood: involvement of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt and NF-kappaB signaling pathways, leading to increased levels of Mcl1, A1, and phosphorylated Bad. J Immunol 2005, 174:3633-3642.
- 161. Moulding DA, Walter C, Hart CA, Edwards SW. Effects of staphylococcal enterotoxins on human neutrophil functions and apoptosis. Infect Immun 1999, 67:2312-2318.
- 162. Liu J, Akahoshi T, Sasahana T, Kitasato H, Namai R, et al. Inhibition of neutrophil apoptosis by verotoxin 2 derived from Escherichia coli O157:H7. Infect Immun 1999, 67:6203-6205.
- 163. Brigotti M, Carnicelli D, Ravanelli E, Barbieri S, Ricci F, et al. Interactions between Shiga toxins and human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. J Leukoc Biol 2008, 84:1019-1027.
- 164. Liles WC, Thomsen AR, O'Mahony DS, Klebanoff SJ. Stimulation of human neutrophils and monocytes by staphylococcal phenol-soluble modulin. J Leukoc Biol 2001, 70:96-102.
- 165. Coxon A, Rieu P, Barkalow FJ, Askari S, Sharpe AH, et al. A novel role for the β 2 integrin CD11b/CD18 in neutrophil apoptosis: a homeostatic mechanism in inflammation. Immunity 1996, 5:653-666.
- 166. Gamberale R, Giordano M, Trevani AS, Andonegui G, Geffner JR. Modulation of human neutrophil apoptosis by immune complexes. J Immunol 1998, 161:3666-3674.
- 167. Watson RW, Redmond HP, Wang JH, BouchierHayes D. Bacterial ingestion, tumor necrosis factoralpha, and heat induce programmed cell death in activated neutrophils. Shock 1996, 5:47-51.
- 168. Engelich G, White M, Hartshorn KL. Neutrophil survival is markedly reduced by incubation with influenza virus and Streptococcus pneumoniae : role of respiratory burst. J Leukoc Biol 2001, 69:50-56.
- 169. Yoshiie K, Kim HY, Mott J, Rikihisa Y. Intracellular infection by the human granulocytic ehrlichiosis agent inhibits human neutrophil apoptosis. Infect Immun 2000, 68:1125-1133.
- 170. van ZG, Gieffers J, Kothe H, Rupp J, Bollinger A, et al. Chlamydia pneumoniae multiply in neutrophil granulocytes and delay their spontaneous apoptosis. J Immunol 2004, 172:1768-1776.

- 171. Wang R, Braughton KR, Kretschmer D, Bach TH, Queck SY, et al. Identification of novel cytolytic peptides as key virulence determinants for communityassociated MRSA. Nat Med 2007, 13:1510-1514.
- 172. Voyich JM, Braughton KR, Sturdevant DE, Whitney AR, Said-Salim B, et al. Insights into mechanisms used by Staphylococcus aureus to avoid destruction by human neutrophils. J Immunol 2005, 175:3907-3919.
- 173. Genestier AL, Michallet MC, Prevost G, Bellot G, Chalabreysse L, et al. Staphylococcus aureus PantonValentine leukocidin directly targets mitochondria and induces Bax-independent apoptosis of human neutrophils. J Clin Invest 2005, 115:3117-3127.
- 174. Usher LR, Lawson RA, Geary I, Taylor CJ, Bingle CD, et al. Induction of neutrophil apoptosis by the Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin pyocyanin: a potential mechanism of persistent infection. J Immunol 2002, 168:1861-1868.
- 175. Ward C, Dransfield I, Chilvers ER, Haslett C, Rossi AG. Pharmacological manipulation of granulocyte apoptosis: potential therapeutic targets. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1999, 20:503-509.
- 176. Kobayashi SD, Voyich JM, Somerville GA, Braughton KR, Malech HL, et al. An apoptosis-differentiation program in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes facilitates resolution of inflammation. J Leukoc Biol 2003, 73:315-322.
- 177. Musser JM, DeLeo FR. Toward a genome-wide systems biology analysis of host-pathogen interactions in group A Streptococcus. Am J Pathol 2005, 167:1461-1472.
- 178. Mott J, Rikihisa Y. Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis agent inhibits superoxide anion generation by human neutrophils. Infect Immun 2000, 68:6697-6703.
- 179. Carlyon JA, Latif DA, Pypaert M, Lacy P, Fikrig E. Anaplasma phagocytophilum utilizes multiple host evasion mechanisms to thwart NADPH oxidasemediated killing during neutrophil infection. Infect Immun 2004, 72:4772-4783.
- 180. Carlyon JA, Chan WT, Galan J, Roos D, Fikrig E. Repression of rac2 mRNA expression by Anaplasma phagocytophila is essential to the inhibition of superoxide production and bacterial proliferation. J Immunol 2002, 169:7009-7018.
- 181. Banerjee R, Anguita J, Roos D, Fikrig E. Cutting edge: infection by the agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis prevents the respiratory burst by down-regulating gp91phox. J Immunol 2000, 164:3946-3949.
- 182. Persson YA, Blomgran-Julinder R, Rahman S, Zheng L, Stendahl O. Mycobacterium tuberculosis-induced apoptotic neutrophils trigger a pro-inflammatory response in macrophages through release of heat shock protein 72, acting in synergy with the bacteria. Microbes Infect 2008, 10:233-240.

- 183. McPhillips K, Janssen WJ, Ghosh M, Byrne A, Gardai S, et al. TNF-alpha inhibits macrophage clearance of apoptotic cells via cytosolic phospholipase A2 and oxidant-dependent mechanisms. J Immunol 2007, 178:8117-8126.
- 184. Michlewska S, Dransfield I, Megson IL, Rossi AG. Macrophage phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils is critically regulated by the opposing actions of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory agents: key role for TNF-alpha. FASEB J 2009, 23:844-854.
- 185. Volpp BD, Nauseef WM, Clark RA. Two cytosolic neutrophil oxidase components absent in autosomal chronic granulomatous disease. Science 1988, 242:1295-1297.
- 186. Curnutte JT, Scott PJ, Mayo LA. Cytosolic components of the respiratory burst oxidase: resolution of four components, two of which are missing in complementing types of chronic granulomatous disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989, 86:825-829.
- 187. Nunoi H, Rotrosen D, Gallin JI, Malech HL. Two forms of autosomal chronic granulomatous disease lack distinct neutrophil cytosol factors. Science 1988, 242:1298-1301.
- 188. Hamers MN, deBoer M, Meirhof LJ, Weening RS, Roos D. Complementation in monocyte hybrids revealing genetic heterogeneity in chronic granulomatous disease. Nature 1984, 307:553-555.
- 189. Royer-Pokora B, Kunkel LM, Monaco AP, Goff SC, Newburger PE, et al. Cloning the gene for an inherited human disorder-chronic granulomatous disease-on the basis of its chromosomal location. Nature 1986, 322:32-38.
- 190. Lekstrom-Himes JA, Gallin JI. Immunodeficiency diseases caused by defects in phagocytes. N Engl J Med 2000, 343:1703-1714.
- 191. Kobayashi SD, Voyich JM, Braughton KR, Whitney AR, Nauseef WM, et al. Gene expression profiling provides insight into the pathophysiology of chronic granulomatous disease. J Immunol 2004, 172:636-643.
- 192. Lekstrom-Himes JA, Kuhns DB, Alvord WG, Gallin JI. Inhibition of human neutrophil IL-8 production by hydrogen peroxide and dysregulation in chronic granulomatous disease. J Immunol 2005, 174:411-417.
- 193. Lekstrom-Himes J, Xanthopoulos KG. Biological role of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein family of transcription factors. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:28545-28548.
- 194. Yamanaka R, Barlow C, Lekstrom-Himes J, Castilla LH, Liu PP, et al. Impaired granulopoiesis, myelodysplasia, and early lethality in CCAAT/enhancer binding protein epsilon-deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997, 94:13187-13192.

<!-- image -->

- 195. Lekstrom-Himes J, Xanthopoulos KG. CCAAT/ enhancer binding protein epsilon is critical for effective neutrophil-mediated response to inflammatory challenge. Blood 1999, 93:3096-3105.
- 196. Gombart AF, Krug U, O'Kelly J, An E, Vegesna V, et al. Aberrant expression of neutrophil and macrophage-related genes in a murine model for human neutrophil-specific granule deficiency. J Leukoc Biol 2005, 78:1153-1165.
- 197. Davis SD, Schaller J, Wedgwood RJ. Job's Syndrome. Recurrent, ''cold'', staphylococcal abscesses. Lancet 1966, 1:1013-1015.
- 198. Minegishi Y, Saito M, Tsuchiya S, Tsuge I, Takada H, et al. Dominant-negative mutations in the DNAbinding domain of STAT3 cause hyper-IgE syndrome. Nature 2007, 448:1058-1062.
- 199. O'Shea JJ, Murray PJ. Cytokine signaling modules in inflammatory responses. Immunity 2008, 28:477-487.

- 200. Serhan CN, Chiang N, Van Dyke TE. Resolving inflammation: dual anti-inflammatory and proresolution lipid mediators. Nat Rev Immunol 2008, 8:349-361.
- 201. Hong S, Porter TF, Lu Y, Oh SF, Pillai PS, et al. Resolvin E1 metabolome in local inactivation during inflammation-resolution. J Immunol 2008, 180:3512-3519.
- 202. Serhan CN, Lu Y, Hong S, Yang R. Mediator lipidomics: search algorithms for eicosanoids, resolvins, and protectins. Methods Enzymol 2007, 432:275-317.
- 203. Serhan CN, Hong S, Lu Y. Lipid mediator informaticslipidomics: novel pathways in mapping resolution. AAPS J 2006, 8:E284-E297.
- 204. Ley TJ, Mardis ER, Ding L, Fulton B, McLellan MD, et al. DNA sequencing of a cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukaemia genome. Nature 2008, 456:66-72.