## REVIEW

## Neutrophil extracellular traps - an a-list-actor in a variety of diseases

Na Wang 1,3 · Xiao-Lin Shi  · Dan Li  · Bin-Bin Li 2 3 3 · Peng Liu  · Hong Luo 3 1

Received: 30 January 2024 / Accepted: 25 July 2024 © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2024

## Abstract

Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) represent a response mechanism in which activated neutrophils release DNA-based webs, adorned with histones and neutrophil proteases, to capture and eliminate invasive microorganisms. However, when these neutrophils become excessively activated, much more proteases associated with NETs are liberated into surrounding tissues or bloodstreams, thereby altering the cellular milieu and causing tissue damage. Recent research has revealed that NETs may play significant roles in the emergence and progression of various diseases, spanning from infections, inflam -mation to autoimmune disorders and cancers. In this review, we delve deeply into the intricate and complex mechanisms that underlie the formation of NETs and their profound interplay with various clinical pathologies. We aim to describe the application perspectives of NETs related proteins in specific disease diagnosis and treatment.

Keywords Neutrophil extracellular traps · Infection · Autoimmune disease · Cancer

## Introduction

As the most numerous leukocytes in the peripheral blood, neutrophils  serve  as  a  cornerstone  in  the  innate  immune defense  system.  They  play  pivotal  roles  in  safeguarding the organism against various infections and injuries. There exists a diverse array of neutrophil death modalities, encom -passing necrosis, apoptosis, pyroptosis, and autophagy [ 1 ]. In recent years, neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs)-related NETosis have garnered attention as a novel mode of neu -trophil death. When neutrophils are stimulated with agents such as Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), a striking transformation in cell morphology occurs. Specifically, the

Na Wang and Xiao-Lin Shi contributed equally to this work.

- Peng Liu liupeng2729@163.com
- Hong Luo dlmuluo@163.com

- 1 College of Medical Laboratory, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning 116044, PR China
- 2 Department of Clinical Laboratory, Weihai Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Weihai, Shandong 264200, PR China
- 3 Department of Central Lab, Weihai Municipal Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Weihai, Shandong 264200, PR China

DNA-based  scaffolding  of  the  NETs  is  liberated  into  the extracellular  milieu,  while  myeloperoxidase  (MPO),  neu -trophil  elastase  (ELANE),  protease  3  (PR3),  cathepsin  G (CG), and other critical components are released. These lib -erated proteases subsequently penetrate into other tissue or cells, resulting in more changes. Unlike conventional apop -tosis  and  necrosis,  the  process  of  NETs  formation mainly involves changes in the nucleus, with fragmentation of the nuclear membrane and freeing of nuclear chromatin to the outside of the cell, accompanied by the process of intracel -lular protease release [ 2 ].

The release of NETs plays a pivotal role in the combat against  bacteria.  As  part  of  this  process,  the  coordinated release of antimicrobial peptides and proteases accompanies the expulsion of NETs, which in turn, annihilates bacteria efficiently, thereby eliciting a potent anti-infective response [3, 4 ].  Initially  reported  by  Brinkmann  et  al.,  NETs  were revealed  after  treating  neutrophils  with  PMA,  displaying a distinct reticular architecture under electron microscopy. This revelation highlighted the capability of NETs to entrap both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria [ 5 ].  Later on, NETs was subsequently identified in monocytes, eosino -phils and mast cells, which also exhibit the ability to release DNA-based  extracellular  trapping  networks  in  response to  lipopolysaccharide  (LPS)  [ 6-8 ].  As  NETs  composed of  DNA,  histones,  and  neutrophil  serine  proteases,  con -centrated in a small localized area, thus enables rapid and

<!-- image -->

synergistic enzymatic reaction [9, 10]. In addition, NETo -sis  also  release  granzymes that activate platelet-activating factor. This activation prompts platelets to aggregate exten -sively,  triggering  autoantibody  production  and  leading  to the formation of immune complexes that are either depos -ited or freely circulating in the bloodstream. Consequently, this  leads  to  a  slow  but  persistent  inflammatory  response, playing a significant role in various ailments such as auto -immune diseases, atherosclerosis, and neoplasia [ 11-14 ].

Extensive  research  has  revealed  a  strong  association between NETs and a wide range of cancer types [ 15 , 16 ]. For instance,  Xia  X  et  al.,  revealed  a  positive  correlation between the level of NETs and the occurrence of hepatic and peritoneal metastases in gastric cancer patients [17]. Simi -larly, in hepatocellular carcinoma, a high plasma NETs was found to significantly accelerate tumour growth and metas -tasis [ 18 ]. Lung cancer and pancreatic cancer tissues have also  been  noted  for  NET  formation  and  tumour  induced venous thrombosis [19, 20].

In  this  review,  we  explore  into  the  intricate  pathways, diverse  influencing  factors,  and  pivotal  roles  played  by NETs across a broad spectrum of diseases. We aim to fur -nish clinicians with a broader array of diagnostic tools and therapeutic strategies, thereby contributing to the advance -ment of disease management in the future.

## The formation of NETs

As the initial responders to chemotactic signals from infec -tion or inflammation, neutrophils remove tissue debris and pathogenic  microorganisms  through  NETs,  contributing to  the  maintenance  of  the  internal  environmental  equilib -rium [ 21 ]. The release of NETs is closely linked to NETo -sis,  a  newly  discovered  mode  of  neutrophil  cell  death. Unlike necrosis or apoptosis, NETosis arise when neutro -phils encounter bacteria or fungi, triggering the activation of  platelets,  a  process  that  is  characterized  by  significant alterations in cell morphology, and without the involvement of  caspases  or  DNA fragmentation [ 22 ].  NETs  have  been increasingly  found  to  be  associated  with  systemic  lupus erythematosus  (SLE),  atherosclerosis,  thrombosis,  novel coronavirus pneumonia, sepsis, and various types of cancer [23 -26 ]. The formation of NETs can be detected in a rela -tively straightforward manner in clinical settings, primarily through the identification of specific serum markers myelo -peroxidase  (MPO)-DNA  and  Cit3-DNA,  as  well  as  the release of NETs-associated granule proteins via the utiliza -tion of immunofluorescence colocalization techniques [27].

When neutrophils are stimulated by PMA or other agents that trigger the formation of NETs, they undergo a distinct morphological  transition.  Initially,  the  rounded  shape  of

the  neutrophils  flattens  out,  coupled  with  the  deletion  of nuclear  proteins  and  the  depolymerization  of  chromatin [ 28 ]. Shortly after their activation, the cells start to flatten considerably and adhere firmly to the underlying substrate. Over  the  next  few  hours,  the  nucleus  loses  its  lobulated nuclear shape, chromatin depolymerizes, and the inner and outer  layers  of  the  nuclear  membrane  separate,  accompa -nied by the disintegration of granules in the cytoplasm. Sub -sequently, the nuclear membrane splits into small blisters, leading to the fusion of nucleoplasm and cytoplasm into a homogeneous blend. Finally, the  cell  membrane  ruptures, releasing NETs [29, 30].

The formation of NETs primarily involves two distinct signal  pathways,  which  occur  as  depicted  in  Fig. 1 . In these  processes,  neutrophils  are  activated  by  various  fac -tors, including PMA, IL-8, the risk-associated protein high mobility  group  box  1  (HMGB1),  and  activated  platelets [31 -34]. This activation prompts the release of Ca 2 + from the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytoplasm, subsequently activating the RAF-MEK-MAPK  pathway  and  protein kinase C (PKC), leading to the assembly of the cell mem -brane and the NADPH oxidase functional complex in the supramembrane subunit, ultimately resulting in the genera -tion and release of substantial amounts of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [35]. Under the influence of ROS, the intra -cellular  polypeptide  arginine  decarboxylase  4  (PAD4)  is activated [36]. This conversion reduce the strong positive charge of histones, thereby weakening their binding affinity for DNA. This, in turn, facilitates the disassembly of hetero -chromatin, a crucial step in the formation of NETs. ELANE and MPO stored in the cytoplasm of neutrophils translocate to the nucleus, where chromatin is further depolymerized in the presence of intracytoplasmic Ca 2 + [37 ] ,  and the nuclear and granule membranes disintegrate, releasing heterochro -matin. The nuclear contents mix with granule proteins in the cytoplasm to form a DNA-based reticulin skeleton and are released from the cell, culminating in neutrophil death and NETosis [38]. Although NETosis primarily manifest within a time of 3-4 h, neutrophils possess the capacity to gener -ate NETs in a remarkably brief duration (ranging from 5 to 60 min). This process is influenced by the kind of stimula -tors [39]. For instance, when LPS stimulates TLR4 recep -tors on activated platelets in septic patients, it enhances the adhesion between platelets and neutrophils, facilitating the expulsion  of  NETs,  while  the  neutrophils  maintain  their morphological  structure  [40].  Furthermore, Staphylococcus aureus triggers  the  release  of  NETs  from  neutrophils, which are then expelled from the cell through vesicle encap -sulation,  thereby  preserving  the  integrity  of  the  plasma membrane [ 41 ]. Additionally, TLR4 and granulocyte/mac -rophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) promote the

Fig. 1 The process of neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation PMA,  IL-8 and pathogens stimulate neutrophils and stimulate Ca 2 + release into the cytoplasm, where the RAF-MEK-MAPK pathway and PKC are activated, prompting the cell to synthesize NADPH oxi -dase complexes and release large amounts of ROS. Under the action of ROS, ELANE and MPO enter the nucleus and cleave histones, while

<!-- image -->

DNDPH oxidase activates PAD4, which further catalyzes the conver -sion of histone arginine to guanine. Further catalyzing the conversion of histone arginine to citrulline, causes chromatin depolymerization. Eventually, the nuclear and cellular membranes fragment and form a DNA-based backbone reticulum while coupling  multiple  neutrophil serine proteases to induce NETosis

release of NETs from mitochondria in a manner reliant on ROS, without causing neutrophil death [ 42 ].

## Factors influencing NETs

NETs  play  important  roles  in  the  innate  immune  system as  a  novel  immune defense mechanism, and provide new pathways to capture and kill extracellular microbes. In the following section, we describe the relevant factors affecting NETs release.

## Promotor of NETs formation

Exogenous  promotors Pathogenic  microbial  derivtives, including  bacterial  surface  components,  lipo-lactic  acid, LPS, N-Formyl-Met-Leu-Phe (fMLP), and PMA have been documented  to  provoke  the  formation  of  NETs.  Numer -ous  microbes,  such  as Staphylococcus  aureus , Klebsiella pneumoniae , Mycobacterium tuberculosis , Candida , Toxoplasma gondii and  human  immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have been reported to be inducers of NETs [43 -48 ]. When pathogenic  microorganisms  invade,  neutrophils  infiltrate the infected tissue. Upon phagocytosis or recognition with these  pathogens,  neutrophils  undergo  activation  and  ROS production, that triggers the release of NETs [49]. Candida albicans ,  being  the  most  common fungal pathogen, could

prompt neutrophils to release NETs via ROS generation and the stimulation of autophagy. Subsequently, the antimicro -bial peptides and proteases residing on these NETs combat with this fungal pathogen [50].

Endogenous  promotors a,  Activated  immune  macro -molecules,  encompassing  immune  complexes,  activated platelets, platelet activating factor (PAF), and autoantibod -ies. Thrombin-stimulated platelets attach to neutrophils and cause changes in histone guanosylation signaling through P-selectin/P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) inter -actions, leading to the formation of NETs [ 51 ].  Kai et al., reported that an augmented presence of NETs was due to the  induction  of  anti-neutrophil  cytoplasmic  autoantibod -ies  (ANCAs)  against  autoantigens  PR3  and  MPO  [ 52 ]. Moreover, studies have shown that patients suffering from systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) exhibit a heightened release of NETs compared to healthy individuals. Interest -ingly,  these  NETs,  along  with  the  binding  antimicrobial peptides like human alpha defensin (HNP-1) and cathelici -din (LL-37), directly activate plasmacytoid dendritic cells via TLR9. This feedback reaction fuels the development of chronic  inflammation  in  SLE  patients  [53].  b,  Cytokines, such as IL-8, Tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), and Mac -rophage inflammatory protein 2 (MIP-2/CXCL2). Inflam -matory  cytokines,  such  as  IL-8  and  TNF-α,  promote  the production of free radicals by neutrophils through the acti -vation  of  NADPH  oxidase  and  MPO,  which  in  turn  pro -motes the production of NETs [ 54 ]. c, Inorganic factors, like Ca 2 + ,  NO, H O . Nikolaos, et al., reported that in patients 2 2 with chronic granulomas, it is difficult for isolated neutro -phils to form NETs as they are deficient in NADPH oxidase. However, intriguingly, when these cells are subjected to the stimulation of H O , they are remarkably capable of gener 2 2 -ating NETs [ 55 ].

## Inhibitor of NETs formation

The formation of NETs can be prevented by using molecu -lar  inhibitors  of  relevant  signaling pathways during NETs production. For example, Meng et al., confirmed that DNase I  reduces  NETs  production  in  antiphospholipid  syndrome due to its proficient degradation of intracellular DNA [ 56 ]. Kawaguchi et al., revealed that Cl amidine, an inhibitor of the PAD4 enzyme, reduced the release of NETs by blocking histone  guanosination  [57].  H S  attenuates  NETs  produc 2 -tion by blocking ROS-mediated activation of ERK1/2 and p38 [ 58 ]. Other antioxidants, like Trolox, Tiron and Tempol, are  effective  agents  for  inhibiting  ROS-dependent  NETs production [59]. Additionally, Murthy et al., demonstrated that chloroquine alleviated acute pancreatitis by suppressing cellular autophagy, thus decreasing NETs generation [60]. Consequently,  the  aforementioned  studies  underscore  the

efficacy of DNase I, PAD4 inhibitors, or protease inhibitors in clinical treatment strategies targeting diseases associated with NETs, as they effectively hinder the progression of the disease and significantly enhance patient prognosis by pre -venting NETs formation.

## Clinical application potential of NETs

An  growing  number  of  studies  underscores  the  profound correlation between NETs and disease advancement. Spe -cifically, antimicrobial peptides and proteases released con -currently with NETs formation are pivotal in the evolution of various pathologies, such as infectious, autoimmune dis -ease,  and  neoplastic  disorders.  Therefore,  the  subsequent section  shall  embark  on  a  comprehensive  examination  of the function of NETs-associated molecular proteins in dis -ease progression across a range of illnesses (Fig. 2 ).

## NETs and pathogenic microbial infections

Neutrophils,  the  primary  protagonists  in  innate  immune defense, initially function through phagocytosis and degran -ulation. However, as research delves deeper into their func -tions,  a  new  mechanism has been discovered, namely the utilization  of  NETs  to  eliminate  pathogenic  microorgan -isms. NETs are exquisite structures, utilizing DNA as their foundational backbone, adorned with diverse of neutrophilaffiliated  proteases.  These  networks  trap  microorganisms through their adhesive properties, confining them to a local -ized area and preventing them from disseminating through -out via the bloodstream.

In patients with cystic fibrosis, the neutrophils' ability to phagocytize and eliminate P. aeruginosa is impaired due to reduced function of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduc -tance regulator (CFTR). In these patients, NETs serve as a catalyst,  facilitating  the  attachment  of  pathogens  to  DNA strands, thus drawing them into close proximity with neutro -phils for phagocytosis, ultimately leading to the destruction of the invading pathogen [ 61 ]. As reported by Anderson et al., NETs have the capacity to capture and eliminate Leishmania protozoa . Moreover, the LPS located on the surface of Leishmania protozoa triggers the release of NETs upon contact with neutrophils. Notably, when treated with DNase I  or  anti-histone  antibodies,  which  disrupt  the  structural integrity of NETs, the survival rate of the parasites increases significantly [ 62 ]. In addition, NETs exhibit powerful effec -tions in antiviral therapy. The DNA backbone attracts and binds to the virus particles electrostatically, thereby restrict -ing their dissemination. And the proteases and antimicrobial peptides further enhance antiviral immunity [63]. The con -stituent histones of NETs contain positively charged amino

Fig. 2 The roles of NETs played in diseases

<!-- image -->

NETs formation or NETosis have been found to be associated with infection, sepsis, pneumonia, thrombosis, autoimmune disorders and cancers

acids that attach to negatively charged viral envelopes while expressing  antiviral  molecules  that  capture  the  virus  and trigger  the  production  of  NETs  via TLR receptors (TLR7 and TLR8), which recognize viral nucleic acids, and their binding induces the production of ROS, which in turn facili -tates HIV-1 clearance via MPO and α-defensins [ 64 ].

Although NETs can effectively kill pathogenic microor -ganisms, certain microbes have cunningly evolved sophisti -cated strategies to withstand this attack. These mechanisms primarily unfold in three distinct manners: Firstly, through their surface-associated structures, pathogens such as Streptococcus pneumoniae utilize dlt manipulators to D-alanyl -ate  the  surface  lipophosphatidic  acid,  thus  introducing  a positive charge to their bacterial surfaces. This innovation effectively halts the entrapment of NETs and restores their ability to propagate through surface-bound DNA enzymes [ 65 ]. Secondly, through secretion of extracellular nucleases. For  instance, S.  aureus secreted  nucleases  and  adenosine synthase A to degrade NETs, converting them into deoxy -adenosine.  This  conversion  triggers  caspase-3-mediated apoptosis in macrophages, allowing the pathogen to evade

NET-mediated killing and phagocytosis, thereby inflicting damage to the host organism [ 66 ]. Finally, through inhibi -tion of NETs formation. For example, the Hepatitis B virus inhibits  the  release  of  NETs  by  boosting  mTOR  activity, decreasing neutrophil autophagy, and inhibiting ERKdependent ROS production, thereby enabling the virus to establish a long-lasting infection within the host cell [67].

## NETs and autoimmune diseases

Under  normal  circumstances,  NETs  function  as  defender against pathogens, and are degraded by DNA enzymes after fulfilling their purpose. However, when NETs are overpro -duced or insufficiently cleared, certain components of NETs would take on a different role, acting as self-antigens. Ulti -mately,  this  triggers  the  generation  of  autoantibodies  and leads to autoimmune disorders. On the one hand, the DNA backbone  and  proteins  within  NETs  can  act  as  autoanti -gens,  prompting  immune cells to  manufacture antibodies. These immune complexes then linger in organs and tissues, setting off a chain reaction that prompts the production of

more NETs, thus creating a detrimental cycle [ 68 ]. On the other hand, relevant components of NETs can act as danger associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) to activate NLRP3 inflammasome, further exacerbating the inflammatory response [10]. In addition, NETs have the ability to activate other immune cells and promote the release of inflamma -tory factors, such as IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α. Given these involvements in autoimmune processes, targeting NETs for inhibition of formation or promoting their degradation may emerge  as  a  novel  therapeutic  approach  for  autoimmune diseases.

The presence of high levels of anti-dsDNA, anti-histone and anti-MPO antibodies in the serum of SLE patients fur -ther confirms a close association with NETs. Hakkim et al., have convincingly demonstrated that SLE patients exhibit a deficit in DNase I, a key enzyme responsible for the degra -dation of NETs. As a result, the clearance of NETs in periph -eral blood is significantly delayed, triggering the production of autoantibodies [69]. In addition, the involvement of low density  granulocyte  (LDG)-mediated  NETs  formation  is noteworthy in SLE patients. LDG possess the capability to spontaneously  generate  NETs  and  promote  autoantibody production [70]. In the patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis (RA), rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs) are present in the serum. NETs contribute  significantly  to  the  production  of ACPAs  [71]. In addition, ACPAs exhibit affinity for guanosine proteins within the NETs, binding to them to create immune com -plexes. These complexes activate the complement system, resulting in an augmentation of the inflammatory response [72]. Additionally, gouty arthritis (GA) is linked to the depo -sition  of  monosodium urate (MSU) crystals. MSU stimu -lates the release of prostaglandins from mast cells and other cells, increasing vascular permeability. In response, neutro -phils migrate more easily towards the site of inflammation and release NETs. This process has two distinct outcomes. Firstly, it aids in the phagocytosis of MSU crystals, thereby preventing the spread of inflammation. Secondly, it involves the release of IL-1β, a potent cytokine that activates neutro -phils, leading to the release of additional inflammatory fac -tors and the recruitment of additional inflammatory cells to the affected site, causing chronic inflammation [73]. NETs is  also  involved  in  anti-neutrophil  cytoplasmic  antibodies (ANCAs) assoicated vasculitis (AAV). As PR3 and MPO are key components of NETs and autoantigens for ANCAs. The interaction between NETs and ANCAs creates a vicious cycle that fuels respiratory outbreaks, which could trigger a wide range of pathological conditions [74].

## NETs and cancers

Cancer poses a serious threat to human life and health. The main cause of death in cancer patients is not the primary tumor,  but  metastastic  tumor  cells.  Recent  studies  have shown that NETs play important roles in prompting cancer metastasis. Generally, NETs facilitate the dissemination of cancer cells by physically ensnaring endothelial cells and circulating tumor cells, while also secreting NETs-associ -ated proteases such as ELANE, PR3, and CG [75]. It has been observed that tumor patients exhibit a higher propen -sity to generate NETs compared to healthy individuals. This trend  is  presumably  attributed  to  the  presence  of  specific factors  emanating  from  tumor  cells,  which  exert  an  indi -rect impact on NET formation. The various tumor-derived factors  include  IL-8,  granulocyte  colony-stimulating  fac -tor  (G-CSF),  high-mobility  group  box  1  (HMGB1),  and histone 1, as highlighted in studies [76 -78]. Subsequently, these factors and NETs further fuel tumor cell metastasis by stimulating latent cancer cells into an active state. Albren -gues et al., induced lung inflammation in mice with breast cancer,  and  reported  a  significant  increase  in  the  genera -tion of NETs. Moreover, they observed that dormant breast cancer cells in mice displayed substantial lung metastasis. However, this metastatic potential was significantly attenu -ated upon the administration of PAD4 inhibitors or DNase, which served to suppress the formation of NETs [79]. To gain a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms that drive the metastasis of dormant cancer cells via NETs, the researchers further explored the use of NETs protease inhibitors. Their findings indicated that the use of ELANE and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) inhibitors resulted in a notable reduction in metastasis among the treated mice. This reduction was attributed to the ability of ELANE and MMP9 to modulate the expression of platelet reactive pro -tein-1 through the cleavage of laminin [79].

Zhang  Y  disclosed  that  NETs,  which  are  abundant  in patients with colorectal cancer, promote platelet activation and  increase  thrombin-antithrombin  complex  levels  [80]. The  components  of  NETs  exhibit  notable  pro-thrombotic properties. For instance, histones are cytotoxic to endothe -lial  cells,  causing  their  impairment  and  triggering  platelet and  fibrin  aggregation,  which  promote  microthrombosis [ 81 ]. Additionally, this process can impede the activity of thrombomodulin and proteinase C, further facilitating  the formation  of  thrombin  [ 82 ].  In  patients  with  hepatocellu -lar  carcinoma, the accumulation of mitochondrial ROS in peripheral neutrophils heightens the inflammatory response surrounding  cancer  cells  and  enhances  metastasis  via  the mitochondrial DNA-reliant NETs. Suppression of the mito -chondrial respiratory chain and NADPH oxidase by metfor -min attenuates the inflammatory response induced by NETs

and mitigates tumor cell metastasis [83]. Furthermore, in a mouse model of colorectal cancer, it has also been observed a  significant  increase  in  mitochondrial  oxygen  related  to NETs  in  tumor  microenvironment  [ 84 ]. NETs  induced metastasis  in  hepatocellular  carcinoma  through  the  sus -tained upregulation of the genes encoding the inflammatory cytokines IL-1α/β, CSF-1, and COX2, which promoted the metastasis of cancer cells through the TLR4/9-COX2 axis, thereby amplifying the inflammatory response to the TME [ 85 ].  Sara  Najmeh  et  al.  demonstrated  that  NETs  highly expressed  β-integrin,  which  promoted  adhesion  between tumor cells and NETs, trapping circulating tumor cells in the  bloodstream  and  prompting  them  to  adhere  to  distant organs, whereas adhesion between the two was significantly reduced and tumor cell metastasis decreased in the presence of relevant inhibitors [ 86 ].

## NETs and other diseases

In  atherosclerotic  patients,  antimicrobial  peptides  and  CG attached to NETs exhibit multifaceted actions. They modu -late  cytokines,  activating  inflammatory  vesicles  and  trig -gering  the  release  of  IL-1β  from  monocytes,  while  also attracting  other  immune  cells,  thereby  fostering  plaque development  [87].  Moreover,  NETs  couple  histones  and MMP9, impair endothelial cells  and  promote  thrombosis. Consequently,  platelet  inhibitors  are  frequently  adminis -tered clinically as a treatment modality for these conditions [ 88 ]. NETs are also pivotal in sepsis. Initially, DNA and his -tones act as DAMPs, directly initiating or augmenting the inflammatory  response.  Secondly,  NETs  directly  activate the coagulation cascade and tissue factor-dependent throm -bin to activate platelets, leading to disturbances in the coag -ulation system. Additionally, NETs inflict direct damage on endothelial and epithelial cells via cytotoxic effects. Given these  intricate  mechanisms,  NETs  emerge  as  promising therapeutic targets for sepsis. The employment of inhibitors targeting DNase and upstream signaling molecules of NETs can effectively mitigate patient symptoms [89, 90].

As the role of NETs in various diseases get more atten -tion, their applications as diagnostic markers have become increasingly evident. For example, NETs are conspicuously present in coronary samples from patients enduring acute myocardial infarction, and their abundance correlates with the  extent  of  the  infarct.  This  correlation  underscores  the potential of NETs as a novel biomarker for atherosclerosis [91]. In the case of coronaviral disease, the interplay between SARS-CoV-2-induced  angiotensin-converting  enzyme  II, serine  protease  and  NETs  subsequently  leading  to  lung epithelial cell death. Therefore, inhibiting the formation or function of NETs emerges as a promising therapeutic target [92]. Furthermore, elevated levels of cell-free nucleosomes,

a surrogate marker for NETs, have been observed in serum samples from patients suffering from community-acquired pneumonia  (CAP)  [93]  and  patients  with  traumatic  brain injury [94]. Given their multifaceted involvement in these pathological processes, NETs represent potential diagnostic marker or therapeutic target for the related afflictions.

## Conclusion

NETs  play  key  roles  in  the  development  of  a  variety  of diseases,  including  infections,  autoimmune  diseases,  and cancers. The utilization of DNA as a fundamental structure, in tandem with the integration of diverse proteases, allows the capture and eradication of pathogenic microorganisms. Autoantigens  like  histones  and  dsDNA,  integral  compo -nents  of  NETs,  trigger  the  formation  of  auto-antibodies, that  contribute  to  the  onset  and  exacerbation  of  autoim -mune diseases. The array of proteases linked to NETs pos -sess remarkable capabilities as they actively promote tumor cell growth, infiltration, and metastasis. Given the profound association  between  NETs  and  numerous  diseases,  the associated  molecular  proteins  of  NETs  have  emerged  as therapeutic targets in clinical practice. However, our under -standing of NETs is still not clear enough. Future research endeavors should be directed towards unearthing additional mechanisms  underlying  NETs  formation,  examining  the role of other NETs components in disease pathogenesis, and discovering novel specific inhibitors to treat NETs associ -ated disorders.

Author contributions HL  and  PL  designed  the  study,  modified  and supervised the manuscript. NW, XLS drafted the manuscript and pre -pared figures. DL, BBL participated in the discussion and writing. All authors have reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

Funding This work was supported by the Incubation Project of Weihai Municipal Hospital (FH2022JZ01, FH2002JZ03).

Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

## Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable.

Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.

## References

- 1. Perez-Figueroa  E,  Alvarez-Carrasco  P,  Ortega  E,  MaldonadoBernal C (2021) Neutrophils: many ways to die. Front Immunol 12:631821. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.631821

- 2. Dabrowska D, Jablonska E, Iwaniuk A, Garley M (2019) Many ways-one destination:  different  types  of  Neutrophils  Death.  Int Rev Immunol 38(1):18-32. https://doi.org/10.1080/08830185.20 18.1540616
- 3. Teng TS, Ji AL, Ji XY, Li YZ (2017) Neutrophils and immunity: from  bactericidal  action  to  being  conquered.  J  Immunol  Res 2017:9671604. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/9671604
- 4. Ermert D, Zychlinsky A, Urban C (2009) Fungal and bacterial killing by neutrophils. Methods Mol Biol 470:293-312. https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-1-59745-204-5\_21
- 5. Brinkmann V, Reichard U, Goosmann C, Fauler B, Uhlemann Y, Weiss DS, Zychlinsky A (2004) Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria. Science 303(5663):1532-1535. https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.1092385
- 6. Doster  RS,  Rogers  LM,  Gaddy  JA, Aronoff  DM  (2018)  Mac -rophage  extracellular  traps:  a  scoping  review.  J  Innate  Immun 10(1):3-13. https://doi.org/10.1159/000480373
- 7. Yousefi S, Gold JA, Andina N, Lee JJ, Kelly AM, Kozlowski E, Simon HU (2008) Catapult-like release of mitochondrial DNA by  eosinophils  contributes  to  antibacterial  defense.  Nat  Med 14(9):949-953. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.1855
- 8. von Kockritz-Blickwede M, Goldmann O, Thulin P, Heinemann K, Norrby-Teglund A, Rohde M, Medina E (2008a) Phagocyto -sis-independent antimicrobial activity of mast cells by means of extracellular  trap  formation.  Blood  111(6):3070-3080.  https:// doi.org/10.1182/blood-2007-07-104018
- 9. Delgado-Rizo  V,  Martinez-Guzman  MA,  Iniguez-Gutierrez  L, Garcia-Orozco A, Alvarado-Navarro A, Fafutis-Morris M (2017) Neutrophil Extracellular traps and its implications in inflamma -tion: an overview. Front Immunol 8:81. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fimmu.2017.00081
- 10. Fousert E, Toes R, Desai J (20 20a). Neutrophil Extracellular traps (NETs) take the Central Stage in driving. Autoimmune Responses Cells 9(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/cells9040915
- 11. Drury B, Hardisty G, Gray RD, Ho GT (2021) Neutrophil Extra -cellular traps in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: pathogenic mecha -nisms  and  clinical  translation.  Cell  Mol  Gastroenterol  Hepatol 12(1):321-333. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.03.002
- 12. Lee KH, Kronbichler A, Park DD, Park Y, Moon H, Kim H, Shin JI  (2017)  Neutrophil  extracellular  traps  (NETs)  in  autoimmune diseases: a comprehensive review. Autoimmun Rev 16(11):11601173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2017.09.012
- 13. Doring  Y,  Soehnlein  O,  Weber  C  (2017)  Neutrophil  Extra -cellular traps in atherosclerosis and Atherothrombo -sis. Circ Res 120(4):736-743. https://doi.org/10.1161/ CIRCRESAHA.116.309692
- 14. Huang  H,  Zhang  H,  Onuma  AE,  Tsung  A  (2020)  Neutrophil elastase and Neutrophil Extracellular traps in the Tumor Micro -environment. Adv Exp Med  Biol 1263:13-23. https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-030-44518-8\_2
- 15. Masucci  MT,  Minopoli  M,  Del  VS,  Carriero  MV  (2020)  The emerging role of Neutrophil Extracellular traps (NETs) in Tumor Progression and Metastasis. Front Immunol 11:1749. https://doi. org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.01749
- 16. Adrover JM, McDowell S, He XY, Quail DF, Egeblad M (2023) NETworking  with  cancer:  the  bidirectional  interplay  between cancer and neutrophil extracellular traps. Cancer Cell 41(3):505526. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2023.02.001
- 17. Xia X, Zhang Z, Zhu C, Ni B, Wang S, Yang S, Zhao G (2022) Neutrophil  extracellular  traps promote  metastasis  in  gastric cancer  patients  with  postoperative  abdominal  infectious  com -plications. Nat  Commun  13(1):1017.  https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41467-022-28492-5
- 18. Zhan  X,  Wu  R,  Kong  XH,  You  Y,  He  K,  Sun  XY,  Duan  L (2023) Elevated neutrophil extracellular traps by HBV-mediated S100A9-TLR4/RAGE-ROS  cascade  facilitate  the  growth  and

<!-- image -->

- metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Commun (Lond) 43(2):225-245. https://doi.org/10.1002/cac2.12388
- 19. Zhang L, Yi H, Chen J, Li H, Luo Y, Cheng T, Pan C (2022) Neutrophil  Extracellular  traps  Facilitate  A549  Cell  Invasion and Migration in a macrophage-maintained inflammatory microenvironment.  Biomed  Res  Int  2022:8316525.  https://doi. org/10.1155/2022/8316525
- 20. Hisada Y, Grover SP, Maqsood A, Houston R, Ay C, Noubouossie DF,  Mackman  N  (2020)  Neutrophils  and  neutrophil  extracel -lular  traps  enhance  venous  thrombosis  in  mice  bearing  human pancreatic  tumor.  Haematologica  105(1):218-225.  https://doi. org/10.3324/haematol.2019.217083
- 21. Wang J (2018) Neutrophils in tissue injury and repair. Cell Tissue Res 371(3):531-539. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00441-017-2785-7
- 22. Yipp BG, Petri B, Salina D, Jenne C, N, Scott BN, Zbytnuik LD, Kubes P (2012) Infection-induced NETosis is a dynamic process involving neutrophil multitasking in vivo. Nat Med 18(9):13861393. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2847
- 23. Thalin C, Hisada Y, Lundstrom S, Mackman N, Wallen H (2019) Neutrophil  Extracellular traps: villains and  targets in arte -rial, venous,  and  Cancer-Associated  thrombosis.  Arterioscler Thromb  Vasc  Biol  39(9):1724-1738.  https://doi.org/10.1161/ ATVBAHA.119.312463
- 24. Middleton EA, He XY, Denorme F, Campbell RA, Ng D, Salva -tore SP, Yost CC (2020) Neutrophil extracellular traps contribute to  immunothrombosis  in  COVID-19  acute  respiratory  distress syndrome.  Blood  136(10):1169-1179.  https://doi.org/10.1182/ blood.2020007008
- 25. Zhang H, Wang Y, Qu M, Li W, Wu D, Cata JP, Miao C (2023) Neutrophil,  neutrophil  extracellular  traps  and  endothelial  cell dysfunction in sepsis. Clin Transl Med 13(1):e1170. https://doi. org/10.1002/ctm2.1170
- 26. Park J, Wysocki RW, Amoozgar Z, Maiorino L, Fein MR, Jorns J, Egeblad M (2016) Cancer cells induce metastasis-supporting neu -trophil extracellular DNA traps. Sci Transl Med 8(361):138r-361r. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aag1711
- 27. Donkel SJ, Wolters FJ, Ikram MA, de Maat M (2021) Circulat -ing myeloperoxidase (MPO)-DNA complexes as marker for Neu -trophil Extracellular traps (NETs) levels and the association with cardiovascular risk factors in the general population. PLoS ONE 16(8):e253698. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0253698
- 28. Alasmari SZ (2020) In vivo imaging of Neutrophil Extracellular traps (NETs): visualization methods and outcomes. Biomed Res Int 2020:4192745. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/4192745
- 29. Pinegin B, Vorobjeva N, Pinegin V (2015) Neutrophil extracel -lular traps and their role in the development of chronic inflamma -tion and autoimmunity. Autoimmun Rev 14(7):633-640. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2015.03.002
- 30. Hamam HJ, Palaniyar N (2019) Post-translational modifications in  NETosis  and  NETs-Mediated  diseases.  Biomolecules  9(8). https://doi.org/10.3390/biom9080369
- 31. Fuchs TA, Abed U, Goosmann C, Hurwitz R, Schulze I, Wahn V, Zychlinsky A (2007) Novel cell death program leads to neutro -phil extracellular traps. J Cell Biol 176(2):231-241. https://doi. org/10.1083/jcb.200606027
- 32. Keshari RS, Jyoti A, Dubey M, Kothari N, Kohli M, Bogra J, Dikshit  M  (2012)  Cytokines  induced  neutrophil  extracellular traps formation: implication for the inflammatory disease condi -tion.  PLoS  ONE  7(10):e48111.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0048111
- 33. Tadie JM, Bae HB, Jiang S, Park DW, Bell CP, Yang H, Zmi -jewski  JW  (2013)  HMGB1  promotes  neutrophil  extracellular trap formation through interactions with toll-like receptor 4. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 304(5):L342-L349. https://doi. org/10.1152/ajplung.00151.2012

- 34. Caudrillier A, Kessenbrock K, Gilliss BM, Nguyen JX, Marques MB, Monestier M, Looney MR (2012) Platelets induce neutro -phil extracellular traps in transfusion-related acute lung injury. J Clin Invest 122(7):2661-2671. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI61303
- 35. Chen T,  Li Y,  Sun  R,  Hu  H,  Liu Y,  Herrmann  M,  Munoz  LE (2021) Receptor-mediated NETosis on neutrophils. Front Immu -nol 12:775267. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.775267
- 36. Cahilog Z, Zhao H, Wu L, Alam A, Eguchi S, Weng H, Ma D (2020) The role of Neutrophil NETosis in Organ Injury: Novel Inflammatory Cell Death mechanisms. Inflammation 43(6):20212032. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10753-020-01294-x
- 37. Burgener SS, Schroder K (2020) Neutrophil extracellular traps in host defense. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 12(7). https://doi. org/10.1101/cshperspect.a037028
- 38. Kawakami T, He J, Morita H, Yokoyama K, Kaji H, Tanaka C, Tohyama Y (2014) Rab27a is essential for the formation of neu -trophil extracellular traps (NETs) in neutrophil-like differentiated HL60  cells.  PLoS  ONE  9(1):e84704.  https://doi.org/10.1371/ journal.pone.0084704
- 39. Kenny EF, Herzig A, Kruger R, Muth A, Mondal S, Thompson PR, Zychlinsky A (2017) Diverse stimuli engage different neutro -phil extracellular trap pathways. Elife 6. https://doi.org/10.7554/ eLife.24437
- 40. Clark  SR,  Ma  AC,  Tavener  SA,  McDonald  B,  Goodarzi  Z, Kelly MM, Kubes P (2007) Platelet TLR4 activates neutrophil extracellular traps to ensnare bacteria in septic blood. Nat Med 13(4):463-469. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1565
- 41. Pilsczek FH, Salina D, Poon KK, Fahey C, Yipp BG, Sibley CD, Kubes  P  (2010)  A  novel  mechanism  of  rapid  nuclear  neutro -phil  extracellular  trap  formation  in  response  to  Staphylococcus aureus. J Immunol 185(12):7413-7425. https://doi.org/10.4049/ jimmunol.1000675
- 42. Yousefi  S,  Mihalache  C,  Kozlowski  E,  Schmid  I,  Simon  HU (2009)  Viable  neutrophils  release  mitochondrial  DNA  to  form neutrophil  extracellular  traps.  Cell  Death  Differ  16(11):14381444. https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2009.96
- 43. von Kockritz-Blickwede M, Goldmann O, Thulin P, Heinemann K, Norrby-Teglund A, Rohde M, Medina E (2008b) Phagocyto -sis-independent antimicrobial activity of mast cells by means of extracellular  trap  formation.  Blood  111(6):3070-3080.  https:// doi.org/10.1182/blood-2007-07-104018
- 44. Papayannopoulos  V,  Metzler  KD,  Hakkim  A,  Zychlinsky  A (2010) Neutrophil elastase and myeloperoxidase regulate the for -mation of neutrophil extracellular traps. J Cell Biol 191(3):677691. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201006052
- 45. Ramos-Kichik  V,  Mondragon-Flores  R,  Mondragon-Castelan M,  Gonzalez-Pozos  S,  Muniz-Hernandez  S,  Rojas-Espinosa O,  Estrada-Garcia  I  (2009)  Neutrophil  extracellular  traps  are induced  by Mycobacterium  tuberculosis .  Tuberculosis  (Edinb) 89(1):29-37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tube.2008.09.009
- 46. He Y, Liu J, Chen Y, Wu J (2022) Neutrophil Extracellular traps in Candida albicans infection. Front Immunol 13:913028. https:// doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.913028
- 47. Miranda F, Rocha BC, Pereira M, Pereira L, de Souza E, Marino AP,  Gazzinelli  RT  (2021) Toxoplasma Gondii -Induced  Neutro -phil Extracellular traps amplify the innate and adaptive response. mBio 12(5):e130721. https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.01307-21
- 48. Moodley M, Moodley J, Naicker T (2020) The role of neutro -phils and their extracellular traps in the synergy of pre-eclampsia and  HIV  infection.  Curr  Hypertens  Rep  22(6):41.  https://doi. org/10.1007/s11906-020-01047-z
- 49. de Jesus GF, Zarate X (2022) Neutrophil extracellular traps: mod -ulation  mechanisms  by  pathogens.  Cell  Immunol  382:104640. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellimm.2022.104640
- 50. Kenno  S,  Perito  S,  Mosci  P,  Vecchiarelli A,  Monari  C  (2016) Autophagy and reactive oxygen species are involved in
- Neutrophil  Extracellular  traps  Release  Induced  by  C. Albicans Morphotypes.  Front  Microbiol  7:879.  https://doi.org/10.3389/ fmicb.2016.00879
- 51. Etulain J, Martinod K, Wong SL, Cifuni SM, Schattner M, Wagner DD (2015) P-selectin promotes neutrophil extracellular trap for -mation in mice. Blood 126(2):242-246. https://doi.org/10.1182/ blood-2015-01-624023
- 52. Kessenbrock K, Krumbholz M, Schonermarck U, Back W, Gross WL, Werb Z, Jenne DE (2009) Netting neutrophils in autoim -mune  small-vessel  vasculitis.  Nat  Med  15(6):623-625.  https:// doi.org/10.1038/nm.1959
- 53. Lande R, Ganguly D, Facchinetti V, Frasca L, Conrad C, Gre -gorio J, Gilliet M (2011) Neutrophils activate plasmacytoid den -dritic cells by releasing self-DNA-peptide complexes in systemic lupus erythematosus. Sci Transl Med 3(73):19r-73r. https://doi. org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3001180
- 54. Fousert E, Toes R, Desai J (2020) Neutrophil Extracellular traps (NETs) take the Central Stage in driving autoimmune responses. Cells 9(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/cells9040915
- 55. Almyroudis NG, Grimm MJ, Davidson BA, Rohm M, Urban CF, Segal BH (2013) NETosis and NADPH oxidase: at the intersec -tion  of  host  defense,  inflammation,  and  injury.  Front  Immunol 4:45. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2013.00045
- 56. Meng H, Yalavarthi S, Kanthi Y, Mazza LF, Elfline MA, Luke CE,  Knight  JS  (2017)  In  vivo  role  of  Neutrophil  Extracellular traps  in  Antiphospholipid  antibody-mediated  venous  thrombo -sis. Arthritis Rheumatol 69(3):655-667. https://doi.org/10.1002/ art.39938
- 57. Kawaguchi H, Matsumoto I, Osada A, Kurata I, Ebe H, Tanaka Y, Sumida T (2019) Peptidyl arginine deiminase inhibition sup -presses arthritis via decreased protein citrullination in joints and serum with the downregulation of interleukin-6. Mod Rheumatol 29(6):964-969. https://doi.org/10.1080/14397595.2018.1532545
- 58. Yang CT, Chen L, Chen WL, Li N, Chen MJ, Li X, Liu J (2019) Hydrogen sulfide primes diabetic wound to close through inhi -bition of NETosis. Mol Cell Endocrinol 480:74-82. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.mce.2018.10.013
- 59. Vorobjeva  NV,  Pinegin  BV  (2016)  Effects  of  the  antioxidants Trolox, Tiron and Tempol on neutrophil extracellular trap forma -tion.  Immunobiology 221(2):208-219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. imbio.2015.09.005
- 60. Murthy P, Singhi AD, Ross MA, Loughran P, Paragomi P, Papa -christou GI, Boone BA (2019) Enhanced neutrophil extracellular trap formation in Acute Pancreatitis contributes to Disease Sever -ity and is reduced by Chloroquine. Front Immunol 10:28. https:// doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2019.00028
- 61. Young RL, Malcolm KC, Kret JE, Caceres SM, Poch KR, Nichols DP, Nick JA (2011) Neutrophil extracellular trap (NET)-mediated killing of Pseudomonas aeruginosa: evidence of acquired resis -tance within the CF airway, independent of CFTR. PLoS ONE 6(9):e23637. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0023637
- 62. Guimaraes-Costa AB, Nascimento MT, Froment GS, Soares RP, Morgado FN, Conceicao-Silva F, Saraiva EM (2009) Leishmania amazonensis promastigotes induce and are killed by neutrophil extracellular traps. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106(16):6748-6753. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900226106
- 63. Schonrich G, Raftery MJ  (2016) Neutrophil Extracellular traps  go  viral.  Front  Immunol  7:366.  https://doi.org/10.3389/ fimmu.2016.00366
- 64. Saitoh T, Komano J, Saitoh Y, Misawa T, Takahama M, Kozaki T,  Akira  S  (2012)  Neutrophil  extracellular  traps  mediate  a host  defense  response  to  human  immunodeficiency  virus-1. Cell Host Microbe 12(1):109-116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. chom.2012.05.015
- 65. Wartha F, Beiter K, Albiger B, Fernebro J, Zychlinsky A, Nor -mark S, Henriques-Normark B (2007) Capsule and D-alanylated

lipoteichoic  acids protect Streptococcus  pneumoniae against neutrophil  extracellular  traps.  Cell  Microbiol  9(5):1162-1171. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00857.x

- 66. Thammavongsa V, Missiakas DM, Schneewind O (2013) Staphylococcus  aureus degrades  neutrophil  extracellular  traps  to  pro -mote immune cell death. Science 342(6160):863-866. https://doi. org/10.1126/science.1242255
- 67. Hu S, Liu X, Gao Y, Zhou R, Wei M, Dong J, Zhao Y (2019) Hepatitis B Virus inhibits Neutrophil Extracellular Trap Release by modulating reactive oxygen species production and autoph -agy. J Immunol 202(3):805-815. https://doi.org/10.4049/ jimmunol.1800871
- 68. Goel RR, Kaplan MJ (2020) Deadliest catch: neutrophil extracel -lular traps in autoimmunity. Curr Opin Rheumatol 32(1):64-70. https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000667
- 69. Hakkim A, Furnrohr BG, Amann K, Laube B, Abed UA, Brink -mann V,  Zychlinsky A  (2010)  Impairment  of  neutrophil  extra -cellular trap degradation is associated with lupus nephritis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107(21):9813-9818. https://doi.org/10.1073/ pnas.0909927107
- 70. Endo A, Komagata Y, Yamagishi K, Kawashima S, Arimura Y, Kaname  S  (2022)  Two  distinct  subsets  of  LDGs  (low  density granulocytes)  in  ANCA-associated  vasculitis.  Mod  Rheumatol 32(2):396-405. https://doi.org/10.1080/14397595.2021.1918883
- 71. Okamoto Y, Devoe S, Seto N, Minarchick V, Wilson T, Rothfuss HM, Demoruelle MK (2022) Association of Sputum Neutrophil Extracellular  Trap  Subsets  with  IgA  Anti-citrullinated  protein antibodies  in  subjects  at  risk  for  rheumatoid  arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol 74(1):38-48. https://doi.org/10.1002/art.41948
- 72. Toes  R,  Pisetsky  DS  (2019)  Pathogenic  effector  functions  of ACPA:  where  do  we  stand?  Ann  Rheum  Dis  78(6):716-721. https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215337
- 73. Zhan Y, Ling Y, Deng Q, Qiu Y, Shen J, Lai H, Wen S (2022) HMGB1-Mediated neutrophil extracellular trap formation exac -erbates Intestinal Ischemia/Reperfusion-Induced  Acute  Lung Injury. J Immunol 208(4):968-978. https://doi.org/10.4049/ jimmunol.2100593
- 74. Fresneda AM, McLaren Z, Wright HL (2021) Neutrophils in the pathogenesis  of  rheumatoid  arthritis  and  systemic  Lupus  Ery -thematosus: same foe different M.O. Front Immunol 12:649693. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.649693
- 75. Giese MA, Hind LE, Huttenlocher A (2019) Neutrophil plastic -ity  in  the  tumor  microenvironment.  Blood  133(20):2159-2167. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2018-11-844548
- 76. Nie M, Yang L, Bi X, Wang Y, Sun P, Yang H, Jiang W (2019) Neutrophil  Extracellular  traps  Induced  by  IL8  promote  diffuse large B-cell lymphoma progression via the TLR9 signaling. Clin Cancer Res 25(6):1867-1879. https://doi.org/10.1158/10780432.CCR-18-1226
- 77. Gomes T,  Varady  C,  Lourenco AL,  Mizurini  DM,  Rondon A, Leal  AC,  Monteiro  RQ  (2019)  IL-1beta  blockade  attenuates thrombosis  in  a  Neutrophil  Extracellular  trap-dependent  breast Cancer Model. Front Immunol 10:2088. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fimmu.2019.02088
- 78. Maugeri  N,  Campana  L,  Gavina  M,  Covino  C,  De  Metrio  M, Panciroli C, Manfredi AA (2014) Activated platelets present high mobility group box 1 to neutrophils, inducing autophagy and pro -moting the extrusion of neutrophil extracellular traps. J Thromb Haemost 12(12):2074-2088. https://doi.org/10.1111/jth.12710
- 79. Albrengues J, Shields MA, Ng D, Park CG, Ambrico A, Poind -exter ME, Egeblad M (2018) Neutrophil extracellular traps pro -duced during inflammation awaken dormant cancer cells in mice. Science 361(6409). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aao4227
- 80. Zhang Y, Wang C, Yu M, Zhao X, Du J, Li Y, Shi J (2019) Neutro -phil extracellular traps induced by activated platelets contribute to

- procoagulant activity in patients with colorectal cancer. Thromb Res 180:87-97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2019.06.005
- 81. Xu J, Zhang X, Pelayo R, Monestier M, Ammollo CT, Semeraro F,  Esmon  CT  (2009)  Extracellular  histones  are  major  media -tors of death in sepsis. Nat Med 15(11):1318-1321. https://doi. org/10.1038/nm.2053
- 82. Ammollo  CT,  Semeraro  F,  Xu  J,  Esmon  NL,  Esmon  CT (2011)  Extracellular  histones  increase  plasma  thrombin  gen -eration by impairing thrombomodulin-dependent protein C activation. J Thromb  Haemost  9(9):1795-1803. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1538-7836.2011.04422.x
- 83. Yang LY, Shen XT, Sun HT, Zhu WW, Zhang JB, Lu L (2022) Neutrophil  extracellular  traps  in  hepatocellular  carcinoma  are enriched  in  oxidized  mitochondrial  DNA  which  is  highly  proinflammatory  and  pro-metastatic.  J  Cancer  13(4):1261-1271. https://doi.org/10.7150/jca.64170
- 84. Yazdani HO, Roy E, Comerci AJ, van der Windt DJ, Zhang H, Huang H, Tohme S (2019) Neutrophil Extracellular traps Drive mitochondrial homeostasis in tumors to augment growth. Can -cer  Res  79(21):5626-5639.  https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472. CAN-19-0800
- 85. Yang LY, Luo Q, Lu L, Zhu WW, Sun HT, Wei R, Qin LX (2020) Increased neutrophil extracellular traps promote metastasis potential  of  hepatocellular  carcinoma  via  provoking  tumorous inflammatory  response.  J  Hematol  Oncol  13(1):3.  https://doi. org/10.1186/s13045-019-0836-0
- 86. Najmeh  S,  Cools-Lartigue  J,  Rayes  RF,  Gowing  S,  Vourtzou -mis  P,  Bourdeau  F,  Spicer  JD  (2017)  Neutrophil  extracellular traps  sequester  circulating  tumor  cells  via  beta1-integrin  medi -ated  interactions.  Int  J  Cancer  140(10):2321-2330.  https://doi. org/10.1002/ijc.30635
- 87. Warnatsch A, Ioannou M, Wang Q, Papayannopoulos V (2015) Inflammation. Neutrophil extracellular traps license macro -phages for cytokine production in atherosclerosis. Science 349(6245):316-320. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa8064
- 88. Zhou P, Li T, Jin J et al Interactions between neutrophil extra -cellular traps and activated platelets enhance procoagulant activ -ity  in  acute  stroke  patients  with  ICA  occlusion.  EBioMedicine 53:102671. https://
- 89. Kumar S, Payal N, Srivastava VK et al Neutrophil extracellular traps and organ dysfunction in sepsis. Clin Chim Acta 523:152162. https://
- 90. Chen Z, Zhang H, Qu M, Nan K, Cao H, Cata JP, Miao C (2021) Review: the emerging role of Neutrophil Extracellular traps in Sepsis and Sepsis-Associated thrombosis. Front Cell Infect Micro -biol 11:653228. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2021.653228
- 91. Doring Y, Weber  C,  Soehnlein  O  (2013)  Footprints  of  neutro -phil  extracellular  traps  as  predictors  of  cardiovascular  risk. Arterioscler  Thromb  Vasc  Biol  33(8):1735-1736.  https://doi. org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.301889
- 92. Veras FP, Pontelli MC, Silva CM, Toller-Kawahisa JE, de Lima M,  Nascimento  DC,  Cunha  FQ  (2020)  SARS-CoV-2-triggered neutrophil  extracellular  traps  mediate  COVID-19  pathology.  J Exp Med 217(12). https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20201129
- 93. Ebrahimi F, Giaglis S, Hahn S, Blum CA, Baumgartner C, Kutz A, Hasler P (2018) Markers of neutrophil extracellular traps pre -dict  adverse  outcome  in  community-acquired  pneumonia:  sec -ondary  analysis  of  a  randomised  controlled  trial.  Eur  Respir  J 51(4). https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.01389-2017
- 94. Chen Y, Zhang H, Hu X, Cai W, Ni W, Zhou K (2022) Role of NETosis in Central Nervous System Injury. Oxid Med Cell Lon -gev 2022:3235524. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/3235524

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris -dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted

manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.